One day—it was the 28th of November, 1893—I was walking back from the Westminster County Court (where I had won my case) to the Temple when the idea of "Ruritania" came into my head. Arrived at my chambers, I reviewed it over a pipe, and the next day I wrote the first chapter. Though sometimes interrupted by law work, I sat tight at the story, sometimes writing as much as two chapters a day. I was only once seriously "stuck up"; I seemed to have got "The Prisoner" so tightly shut up in "Zenda" that it was impossible to get him out of it. But that difficulty was in the end surmounted and, on the whole, the writing was easy and pleasurable. I finished the first draft in just a month—on the 29th of December. I did not regard it as nearly such a "serious effort" as I had attempted once or twice before—not so ambitious certainly as The God in the Car, which I had finished just about a month before I began The Prisoner, though it was not published till later; but, on the other hand, rather more ambitious than a series of little dialogues which I had already begun—or began very soon afterwards (I cannot trace the exact dates)—in the Westminster Gazette; with these latter I used to amuse myself on "off" evenings in the study at St. Bride's Vicarage, and, honestly, nobody was more surprised than I was at the notice they attracted.

The root idea of The Prisoner of Zenda is, of course, merely a variant on the old and widespread theme of "mistaken identity." It is indeed astonishing how many stories, novels, and plays may be reduced on analysis to this ancient plot and this elementary situation. Sometimes it is very nearly the whole story, sometimes only an ingredient in a more elaborate structure; but in some shape, and in varying degrees, it pervades English comedy from Shakespeare's day to our own. In itself it is no more than a starting-point for the characters, emotions, and incidents which it is the writer's real business to develop, but it opens a fruitful field to an imagination which can see and work out its dramatic possibilities and the ways in which it can be varied. I think that the two variants which struck the popular fancy in my little book were royalty and red hair; the former is always a safe card to play, and its combination with the latter had a touch of novelty.

However that may be, the old situation served yet another author well in my person, and gave that decisive impulse for which my wavering mind had been waiting. The book came out about the beginning of April, 1894; its success was quick and great.
