“India’s Coral Strand”

A PASSAGE TO INDIA. By E. M. Forster. New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co. 1924.

Reviewed by Henry W. Nevinson

It is unfortunate that the very name of India arouses despair or indifference in British hearts. Our average citizen thinks vaguely of a vast country inhabited by hordes of brown or blackish “natives,” who worship strange and improper gods, are given to atrocious mutinies and massacres, and would fight horribly among themselves if the controlling power of England were withdrawn. To some of us India is a field for missionary enterprise, to others a field for the lucrative employment of our sons, to others, again, a market for our cotton goods. There have been stages in our knowledge or our ignorance. There was the stage of the “Nabobs,” when India was a dream of diamonds and gold and pearls; a country which we had acquired by the might of our sword for our own advantage, and to which no one questioned our right. There was the stage of “India’s coral strand”—the stage when India was to us the scene of widows burnt alive, madmen swinging themselves by hooks from poles as an act of sanctity, and worshippers flinging themselves beneath the bloody wheels of Juggernaut; from which abominations only English missionaries could save them. In that stage I was brought up, but about thirty years ago it was succeeded by the Kipling stage, when India was seen revealed as the home of incomprehensible “natives” and jungley beasts, dominated for their own good by the British sons of “The Blood,” who spent their time in deeds of amazing courage and the seduction of each other’s wives.

At each stage our conception was entirely false—as false as the “coral strand” of India, where, I believe, not a bead of coral could be found. And so it came about that, as each stage passed, most of our people felt a chill of despair or indifference when the name of India was mentioned. When “the man in the street” sees a column of news from India in his morning paper, he hastily turns the page to a full-blooded murder in Eastbourne or the suburbs. Till quite lately, a debate on India in the House of Commons was taken as a signal for a members’ holiday, like the Derby Day. India has become a subject passing the wit of “the man in the street.” Surely we must be content to leave it to our experts—our well-paid Viceroy, our Lieutenant Governors, our Collectors and Commissioners, our trustworthy police, or, if the worst came to the worst, our gallant British troops, which are maintained in the country at India’s expense, and for her benefit. Are not our Judges a marvel of Justice? Is not our Indian Civil Service the wonder of the world?

That was the ordinary attitude of this country while I was in India during the period known as “The Unrest.” But lately I have noticed some small change in opinion. It has been caused partly by the general upheaval of all traditions and ideas since the Great War; partly by the growing insistence of Indians themselves, as seen by the present delegation of Srinivasa Sastri and other leaders who are now in London with Dr. Annie Besant; but chiefly by the widespread horror at the Amritsar massacre about five years ago, the shameful speeches about it in the debate in the House of Lords, and what appears to me the still greater shame of the methods and judgment in the recent libel action upon that very point brought by Sir Michael O’Dwyer against Mr. Sankaran Nair, one of the most eminent and moderate of Indian statesmen. And now, just at what our scientific novelists call “the Psychological Moment,” comes this book of Mr. E. M. Forster, long recognized as one of our best and most thoughtful writers, not only of fiction.

Certainly the book is fiction of a kind. It may be called a novel, for it is an imaginary story with a carefully devised and elaborated plot, a certain amount of “love interest” (not much, thank heaven!), a beginning, a middle, and an end, like all works of imaginative art. At its climax the story even becomes exciting—all the more “intriguing” (if one must use that tiresome French word) because the heart of the mystery is never precisely explained. Just as a story it is excellent, being written with all the humor and irony of style that one expects from its distinguished author. Humor, irony, and sympathy are, in fact, his distinctions, and I could only question his dubious use of the pronoun “he,” which often leaves me in doubt what “he” is referred to. The use is so frequent that I suppose it is intentional, but it puzzles a careful reader like myself, and is repeatedly driving him back to solve a problem that should not exist.

But the story, though fine and full of characters finely suggested, is not the vital or most significant part of the work. It is the picture of Anglo-Indian life and character on the one side, and of Indian life and character on the other that is vital and significant. I have read many volumes written from both sides. At one time I knew both the missionary books and the Kipling books almost by heart. Since then I have travelled far and wide through India, and have consorted with Anglo-Indians of all ranks, and with Indians of all castes and classes. But I have never known so accurate, so penetrating, and so sympathetic an account of these divergent characters and lives as this. It is sympathetic with both sides. On the one hand we are shown the British official in all his real glory—devoted to his routine, inflexible in what he thinks justice, above suspicion of corruption, toiling almost incessantly upon work for which he receives no thanks, no recognition; separated from his wife, who must go to the hills or “home,” and from his children who must be brought up far away in England; fairly paid but obliged to spend largely, unknown in his own country, and in the end destined, if he survives the fevers and the heat, to spend an old age upon the golf links or in the sanatoria of Cheltenham and Harrowgate. I have known these people well, and, on my word, there is no class of mankind that I admire more. So calm they are in the midst of perpetual dangers, so dignified in behavior, and so silent.

That side of our British workers Mr. Forster shows us, but he also shows us the other—the stiff aloofness, the pride refusing intercourse with “natives,” the contempt, especially for the “educated Indian,” the degrading use of spies—an abomination from which even I suffered much when I was in India. We are shown also the occasional outbursts of insensate and unreasoning passion, especially in the case of the Anglo-Indian women, who are our stiffest obstacle in attempting any friendly intercourse with the Indian peoples. As an Indian says in the book, an Englishman comes out intending to be a gentleman, but is told it will not do. It is the women who tell him so. It may take two years to make him like every one else, but it takes only six months for a woman. And so with time—and not a long time—the state of mind is reached depicted in the two following paragraphs:

Nothing enrages Anglo-India more than the lantern of reason if it is exhibited for one moment after its extinction is decreed. All over Chandrapore that day the Europeans were putting aside their normal personalities, and sinking themselves in their community. Pity, wrath, heroism filled them, but the power of putting two and two together was annihilated.

Or again, when women are discussing the same incident—the wrongfully imagined assault upon an English girl by a “native”—

“I say there’s not such a thing as cruelty after a thing like this.”

“Exactly, and remember it afterwards, you men. You’re weak, weak, weak. Why they ought to crawl from here to the caves on their hands and knees whenever an Englishwoman’s in sight, they oughtn’t to be spoken to, they ought to be spat at, they ought to be ground into the dust; we’ve been far too kind.”

That is the spirit which makes Amritsar massacres, and afterwards glories in them, and gets up subscriptions for the agent. It is an illustration of what I myself wrote from India some years ago:

The deterioration of a new-comer who has been sent out with the usual instincts of our educated classes in favor of politeness and decency, is often as unconscious as it is rapid. The pressure of his social surroundings is almost irresistible. If he does not wish to cut himself off altogether from the society and amusements of his own people, he will be driven to conform to the code of insolence established among them.

Set such a man to govern the Indian peoples, among whom reverential manners and deferential politeness are ingrained by birth—imaginative peoples, sensitive to slights, but always tempted to cringe and to flatter and bribe the man in power, and then what a degeneration of two great races, British and Indian, is likely to ensue! That is the root problem of India now, and I have never seen it so plainly stated as in this discerning story of manners and characters opposed.

For Mr. Forster does not deal only with the weakness of our British nature when placed in so unnatural a position as in India. He shows us the weakness of the Indian too—his tendency to break down and sob, his habit of wandering off into futile discussions when the moment calls for action, his want of persistence, his readiness to submit to orders, his fanatical unreason, and above all his suspicion of every Anglo-Indian action whether good or bad. As to the “efficiency” that Lord Curzon preached for India, one of the Indians in the story admits they have not got it:

“We can’t coördinate, we can’t coördinate, it only comes to that. We can’t keep engagements, we can’t catch trains. What more than this is the so-called spirituality of India?”

Moslems and Hindus are mingled in the story, and we are shown the marked difference in character, though there is no hostility, and little boasted superiority of the one form of religion over the other. That is one of the author’s triumphs, and for the descriptive style of a quiet and discerning eye, I may quote the following picture of an Indian eventide as all who have lived in India know it:

The promontory was covered with lofty trees, and the fruit-bats were unhooking from the boughs and making kissing sounds as they grazed the surface of the tank; hanging upside down all the day, they had grown thirsty. The signs of the contented Indian evening multiplied; frogs on all sides, cow-dung burning eternally; a flock of belated hornbills overhead, looking like winged skeletons as they flapped across the gloaming. There was death in the air, but not sadness; a compromise had been made between destiny and desire, and even the heart of man acquiesced.
