## CHAPTER VIII STRIFE IN LOVE

Arthur finished his apprenticeship, and got a job on the electrical plant at Minton Pit. He earned very little, but had a good chance of getting on. But he was wild and restless. He did not drink nor gamble. Yet he somehow contrived to get into endless scrapes, always through some hot-headed thoughtlessness. Either he went rabbiting in the woods, like a poacher, or he stayed in Nottingham all night instead of coming home, or he miscalculated his dive into the canal at Bestwood, and scored his chest into one mass of wounds on the raw stones and tins at the bottom.

He had not been at his work many months when again he did not come home one night.

“Do you know where Arthur is?” asked Paul at breakfast.

“I do not,” replied his mother.

“He is a fool,” said Paul. “And if he did anything I shouldn’t mind. But no, he simply can’t come away from a game of whist, or else he must see a girl home from the skating-rink—quite proprietously—and so can’t get home. He’s a fool.”

“I don’t know that it would make it any better if he did something to make us all ashamed,” said Mrs. Morel.

“Well, I should respect him more,” said Paul.

“I very much doubt it,” said his mother coldly.

They went on with breakfast.

“Are you fearfully fond of him?” Paul asked his mother.

“What do you ask that for?”

“Because they say a woman always like the youngest best.”

“She may do—but I don’t. No, he wearies me.”

“And you’d actually rather he was good?”

“I’d rather he showed some of a man’s common sense.”

Paul was raw and irritable. He also wearied his mother very often. She saw the sunshine going out of him, and she resented it.

As they were finishing breakfast came the postman with a letter from Derby. Mrs. Morel screwed up her eyes to look at the address.

“Give it here, blind eye!” exclaimed her son, snatching it away from her.

She started, and almost boxed his ears.

“It’s from your son, Arthur,” he said.

“What now—!” cried Mrs. Morel.

“‘My dearest Mother,’” Paul read, “‘I don’t know what made me such a fool. I want you to come and fetch me back from here. I came with Jack Bredon yesterday, instead of going to work, and enlisted. He said he was sick of wearing the seat of a stool out, and, like the idiot you know I am, I came away with him.

“‘I have taken the King’s shilling, but perhaps if you came for me they would let me go back with you. I was a fool when I did it. I don’t want to be in the army. My dear mother, I am nothing but a trouble to you. But if you get me out of this, I promise I will have more sense and consideration. . . .’”

Mrs. Morel sat down in her rocking-chair.

“Well, now,” she cried, “let him stop!”

“Yes,” said Paul, “let him stop.”

There was silence. The mother sat with her hands folded in her apron, her face set, thinking.

“If I’m not sick!” she cried suddenly. “Sick!”

“Now,” said Paul, beginning to frown, “you’re not going to worry your soul out about this, do you hear.”

“I suppose I’m to take it as a blessing,” she flashed, turning on her son.

“You’re not going to mount it up to a tragedy, so there,” he retorted.

“The fool!—the young fool!” she cried.

“He’ll look well in uniform,” said Paul irritatingly.

His mother turned on him like a fury.

“Oh, will he!” she cried. “Not in my eyes!”

“He should get in a cavalry regiment; he’ll have the time of his life, and will look an awful swell.”

“Swell!—swell!—a mighty swell idea indeed!—a common soldier!”

“Well,” said Paul, “what am I but a common clerk?”

“A good deal, my boy!” cried his mother, stung.

“What?”

“At any rate, a man, and not a thing in a red coat.”

“I shouldn’t mind being in a red coat—or dark blue, that would suit me better—if they didn’t boss me about too much.”

But his mother had ceased to listen.

“Just as he was getting on, or might have been getting on, at his job—a young nuisance—here he goes and ruins himself for life. What good will he be, do you think, after this?”

“It may lick him into shape beautifully,” said Paul.

“Lick him into shape!—lick what marrow there was out of his bones. A soldier!—a common soldier!—nothing but a body that makes movements when it hears a shout! It’s a fine thing!”

“I can’t understand why it upsets you,” said Paul.

“No, perhaps you can’t. But I understand;” and she sat back in her chair, her chin in one hand, holding her elbow with the other, brimmed up with wrath and chagrin.

“And shall you go to Derby?” asked Paul.

“Yes.”

“It’s no good.”

“I’ll see for myself.”

“And why on earth don’t you let him stop. It’s just what he wants.”

“Of course,” cried the mother, “you know what he wants!”

She got ready and went by the first train to Derby, where she saw her son and the sergeant. It was, however, no good.

When Morel was having his dinner in the evening, she said suddenly:

“I’ve had to go to Derby to-day.”

The miner turned up his eyes, showing the whites in his black face.

“Has ter, lass. What took thee there?”

“That Arthur!”

“Oh—an’ what’s agate now?”

“He’s only enlisted.”

Morel put down his knife and leaned back in his chair.

“Nay,” he said, “that he niver ’as!”

“And is going down to Aldershot to-morrow.”

“Well!” exclaimed the miner. “That’s a winder.” He considered it a moment, said “H’m!” and proceeded with his dinner. Suddenly his face contracted with wrath. “I hope he may never set foot i’ my house again,” he said.

“The idea!” cried Mrs. Morel. “Saying such a thing!”

“I do,” repeated Morel. “A fool as runs away for a soldier, let ’im look after ’issen; I s’ll do no more for ’im.”

“A fat sight you have done as it is,” she said.

And Morel was almost ashamed to go to his public-house that evening.

“Well, did you go?” said Paul to his mother when he came home.

“I did.”

“And could you see him?”

“Yes.”

“And what did he say?”

“He blubbered when I came away.”

“H’m!”

“And so did I, so you needn’t ‘h’m’!”

Mrs. Morel fretted after her son. She knew he would not like the army. He did not. The discipline was intolerable to him.

“But the doctor,” she said with some pride to Paul, “said he was perfectly proportioned—almost exactly; all his measurements were correct. He is good-looking, you know.”

“He’s awfully nice-looking. But he doesn’t fetch the girls like William, does he?”

“No; it’s a different character. He’s a good deal like his father, irresponsible.”

To console his mother, Paul did not go much to Willey Farm at this time. And in the autumn exhibition of students’ work in the Castle he had two studies, a landscape in water-colour and a still life in oil, both of which had first-prize awards. He was highly excited.

“What do you think I’ve got for my pictures, mother?” he asked, coming home one evening. She saw by his eyes he was glad. Her face flushed.

“Now, how should I know, my boy!”

“A first prize for those glass jars—”

“H’m!”

“And a first prize for that sketch up at Willey Farm.”

“Both first?”

“Yes.”

“H’m!”

There was a rosy, bright look about her, though she said nothing.

“It’s nice,” he said, “isn’t it?”

“It is.”

“Why don’t you praise me up to the skies?”

She laughed.

“I should have the trouble of dragging you down again,” she said.

But she was full of joy, nevertheless. William had brought her his sporting trophies. She kept them still, and she did not forgive his death. Arthur was handsome—at least, a good specimen—and warm and generous, and probably would do well in the end. But Paul was going to distinguish himself. She had a great belief in him, the more because he was unaware of his own powers. There was so much to come out of him. Life for her was rich with promise. She was to see herself fulfilled. Not for nothing had been her struggle.

Several times during the exhibition Mrs. Morel went to the Castle unknown to Paul. She wandered down the long room looking at the other exhibits. Yes, they were good. But they had not in them a certain something which she demanded for her satisfaction. Some made her jealous, they were so good. She looked at them a long time trying to find fault with them. Then suddenly she had a shock that made her heart beat. There hung Paul’s picture! She knew it as if it were printed on her heart.

“Name—Paul Morel—First Prize.”

It looked so strange, there in public, on the walls of the Castle gallery, where in her lifetime she had seen so many pictures. And she glanced round to see if anyone had noticed her again in front of the same sketch.

But she felt a proud woman. When she met well-dressed ladies going home to the Park, she thought to herself:

“Yes, you look very well—but I wonder if your son has two first prizes in the Castle.”

And she walked on, as proud a little woman as any in Nottingham. And Paul felt he had done something for her, if only a trifle. All his work was hers.

One day, as he was going up Castle Gate, he met Miriam. He had seen her on the Sunday, and had not expected to meet her in town. She was walking with a rather striking woman, blonde, with a sullen expression, and a defiant carriage. It was strange how Miriam, in her bowed, meditative bearing, looked dwarfed beside this woman with the handsome shoulders. Miriam watched Paul searchingly. His gaze was on the stranger, who ignored him. The girl saw his masculine spirit rear its head.

“Hello!” he said, “you didn’t tell me you were coming to town.”

“No,” replied Miriam, half apologetically. “I drove in to Cattle Market with father.”

He looked at her companion.

“I’ve told you about Mrs. Dawes,” said Miriam huskily; she was nervous. “Clara, do you know Paul?”

“I think I’ve seen him before,” replied Mrs. Dawes indifferently, as she shook hands with him. She had scornful grey eyes, a skin like white honey, and a full mouth, with a slightly lifted upper lip that did not know whether it was raised in scorn of all men or out of eagerness to be kissed, but which believed the former. She carried her head back, as if she had drawn away in contempt, perhaps from men also. She wore a large, dowdy hat of black beaver, and a sort of slightly affected simple dress that made her look rather sack-like. She was evidently poor, and had not much taste. Miriam usually looked nice.

“Where have you seen me?” Paul asked of the woman.

She looked at him as if she would not trouble to answer. Then:

“Walking with Louie Travers,” she said.

Louie was one of the “Spiral” girls.

“Why, do you know her?” he asked.

She did not answer. He turned to Miriam.

“Where are you going?” he asked.

“To the Castle.”

“What train are you going home by?”

“I am driving with father. I wish you could come too. What time are you free?”

“You know not till eight to-night, damn it!”

And directly the two women moved on.

Paul remembered that Clara Dawes was the daughter of an old friend of Mrs. Leivers. Miriam had sought her out because she had once been Spiral overseer at Jordan’s, and because her husband, Baxter Dawes, was smith for the factory, making the irons for cripple instruments, and so on. Through her Miriam felt she got into direct contact with Jordan’s, and could estimate better Paul’s position. But Mrs. Dawes was separated from her husband, and had taken up Women’s Rights. She was supposed to be clever. It interested Paul.

Baxter Dawes he knew and disliked. The smith was a man of thirty-one or thirty-two. He came occasionally through Paul’s corner—a big, well-set man, also striking to look at, and handsome. There was a peculiar similarity between himself and his wife. He had the same white skin, with a clear, golden tinge. His hair was of soft brown, his moustache was golden. And he had a similar defiance in his bearing and manner. But then came the difference. His eyes, dark brown and quick-shifting, were dissolute. They protruded very slightly, and his eyelids hung over them in a way that was half hate. His mouth, too, was sensual. His whole manner was of cowed defiance, as if he were ready to knock anybody down who disapproved of him—perhaps because he really disapproved of himself.

From the first day he had hated Paul. Finding the lad’s impersonal, deliberate gaze of an artist on his face, he got into a fury.

“What are yer lookin’ at?” he sneered, bullying.

The boy glanced away. But the smith used to stand behind the counter and talk to Mr. Pappleworth. His speech was dirty, with a kind of rottenness. Again he found the youth with his cool, critical gaze fixed on his face. The smith started round as if he had been stung.

“What’r yer lookin’ at, three hap’orth o’ pap?” he snarled.

The boy shrugged his shoulders slightly.

“Why yer—!” shouted Dawes.

“Leave him alone,” said Mr. Pappleworth, in that insinuating voice which means, “He’s only one of your good little sops who can’t help it.”

Since that time the boy used to look at the man every time he came through with the same curious criticism, glancing away before he met the smith’s eye. It made Dawes furious. They hated each other in silence.

Clara Dawes had no children. When she had left her husband the home had been broken up, and she had gone to live with her mother. Dawes lodged with his sister. In the same house was a sister-in-law, and somehow Paul knew that this girl, Louie Travers, was now Dawes’s woman. She was a handsome, insolent hussy, who mocked at the youth, and yet flushed if he walked along to the station with her as she went home.

The next time he went to see Miriam it was Saturday evening. She had a fire in the parlour, and was waiting for him. The others, except her father and mother and the young children, had gone out, so the two had the parlour together. It was a long, low, warm room. There were three of Paul’s small sketches on the wall, and his photo was on the mantelpiece. On the table and on the high old rosewood piano were bowls of coloured leaves. He sat in the armchair, she crouched on the hearthrug near his feet. The glow was warm on her handsome, pensive face as she kneeled there like a devotee.

“What did you think of Mrs. Dawes?” she asked quietly.

“She doesn’t look very amiable,” he replied.

“No, but don’t you think she’s a fine woman?” she said, in a deep tone,

“Yes—in stature. But without a grain of taste. I like her for some things. Is she disagreeable?”

“I don’t think so. I think she’s dissatisfied.”

“What with?”

“Well—how would you like to be tied for life to a man like that?”

“Why did she marry him, then, if she was to have revulsions so soon?”

“Ay, why did she!” repeated Miriam bitterly.

“And I should have thought she had enough fight in her to match him,” he said.

Miriam bowed her head.

“Ay?” she queried satirically. “What makes you think so?”

“Look at her mouth—made for passion—and the very setback of her throat—” He threw his head back in Clara’s defiant manner.

Miriam bowed a little lower.

“Yes,” she said.

There was a silence for some moments, while he thought of Clara.

“And what were the things you liked about her?” she asked.

“I don’t know—her skin and the texture of her—and her—I don’t know—there’s a sort of fierceness somewhere in her. I appreciate her as an artist, that’s all.”

“Yes.”

He wondered why Miriam crouched there brooding in that strange way. It irritated him.

“You don’t really like her, do you?” he asked the girl.

She looked at him with her great, dazzled dark eyes.

“I do,” she said.

“You don’t—you can’t—not really.”

“Then what?” she asked slowly.

“Eh, I don’t know—perhaps you like her because she’s got a grudge against men.”

That was more probably one of his own reasons for liking Mrs. Dawes, but this did not occur to him. They were silent. There had come into his forehead a knitting of the brows which was becoming habitual with him, particularly when he was with Miriam. She longed to smooth it away, and she was afraid of it. It seemed the stamp of a man who was not her man in Paul Morel.

There were some crimson berries among the leaves in the bowl. He reached over and pulled out a bunch.

“If you put red berries in your hair,” he said, “why would you look like some witch or priestess, and never like a reveller?”

She laughed with a naked, painful sound.

“I don’t know,” she said.

His vigorous warm hands were playing excitedly with the berries.

“Why can’t you laugh?” he said. “You never laugh laughter. You only laugh when something is odd or incongruous, and then it almost seems to hurt you.”

She bowed her head as if he were scolding her.

“I wish you could laugh at me just for one minute—just for one minute. I feel as if it would set something free.”

“But”—and she looked up at him with eyes frightened and struggling—“I do laugh at you—I do.”

“Never! There’s always a kind of intensity. When you laugh I could always cry; it seems as if it shows up your suffering. Oh, you make me knit the brows of my very soul and cogitate.”

Slowly she shook her head despairingly.

“I’m sure I don’t want to,” she said.

“I’m so damned spiritual with you always!” he cried.

She remained silent, thinking, “Then why don’t you be otherwise.” But he saw her crouching, brooding figure, and it seemed to tear him in two.

“But, there, it’s autumn,” he said, “and everybody feels like a disembodied spirit then.”

There was still another silence. This peculiar sadness between them thrilled her soul. He seemed so beautiful with his eyes gone dark, and looking as if they were deep as the deepest well.

“You make me so spiritual!” he lamented. “And I don’t want to be spiritual.”

She took her finger from her mouth with a little pop, and looked up at him almost challenging. But still her soul was naked in her great dark eyes, and there was the same yearning appeal upon her. If he could have kissed her in abstract purity he would have done so. But he could not kiss her thus—and she seemed to leave no other way. And she yearned to him.

He gave a brief laugh.

“Well,” he said, “get that French and we’ll do some—some Verlaine.”

“Yes,” she said in a deep tone, almost of resignation. And she rose and got the books. And her rather red, nervous hands looked so pitiful, he was mad to comfort her and kiss her. But then he dared not—or could not. There was something prevented him. His kisses were wrong for her. They continued the reading till ten o’clock, when they went into the kitchen, and Paul was natural and jolly again with the father and mother. His eyes were dark and shining; there was a kind of fascination about him.

When he went into the barn for his bicycle he found the front wheel punctured.

“Fetch me a drop of water in a bowl,” he said to her. “I shall be late, and then I s’ll catch it.”

He lighted the hurricane lamp, took off his coat, turned up the bicycle, and set speedily to work. Miriam came with the bowl of water and stood close to him, watching. She loved to see his hands doing things. He was slim and vigorous, with a kind of easiness even in his most hasty movements. And busy at his work he seemed to forget her. She loved him absorbedly. She wanted to run her hands down his sides. She always wanted to embrace him, so long as he did not want her.

“There!” he said, rising suddenly. “Now, could you have done it quicker?”

“No!” she laughed.

He straightened himself. His back was towards her. She put her two hands on his sides, and ran them quickly down.

“You are so fine!” she said.

He laughed, hating her voice, but his blood roused to a wave of flame by her hands. She did not seem to realise him in all this. He might have been an object. She never realised the male he was.

He lighted his bicycle-lamp, bounced the machine on the barn floor to see that the tyres were sound, and buttoned his coat.

“That’s all right!” he said.

She was trying the brakes, that she knew were broken.

“Did you have them mended?” she asked.

“No!”

“But why didn’t you?”

“The back one goes on a bit.”

“But it’s not safe.”

“I can use my toe.”

“I wish you’d had them mended,” she murmured.

“Don’t worry—come to tea to-morrow, with Edgar.”

“Shall we?”

“Do—about four. I’ll come to meet you.”

“Very well.”

She was pleased. They went across the dark yard to the gate. Looking across, he saw through the uncurtained window of the kitchen the heads of Mr. and Mrs. Leivers in the warm glow. It looked very cosy. The road, with pine trees, was quite black in front.

“Till to-morrow,” he said, jumping on his bicycle.

“You’ll take care, won’t you?” she pleaded.

“Yes.”

His voice already came out of the darkness. She stood a moment watching the light from his lamp race into obscurity along the ground. She turned very slowly indoors. Orion was wheeling up over the wood, his dog twinkling after him, half smothered. For the rest the world was full of darkness, and silent, save for the breathing of cattle in their stalls. She prayed earnestly for his safety that night. When he left her, she often lay in anxiety, wondering if he had got home safely.

He dropped down the hills on his bicycle. The roads were greasy, so he had to let it go. He felt a pleasure as the machine plunged over the second, steeper drop in the hill. “Here goes!” he said. It was risky, because of the curve in the darkness at the bottom, and because of the brewers’ waggons with drunken waggoners asleep. His bicycle seemed to fall beneath him, and he loved it. Recklessness is almost a man’s revenge on his woman. He feels he is not valued, so he will risk destroying himself to deprive her altogether.

The stars on the lake seemed to leap like grasshoppers, silver upon the blackness, as he spun past. Then there was the long climb home.

“See, mother!” he said, as he threw her the berries and leaves on to the table.

“H’m!” she said, glancing at them, then away again. She sat reading, alone, as she always did.

“Aren’t they pretty?”

“Yes.”

He knew she was cross with him. After a few minutes he said:

“Edgar and Miriam are coming to tea to-morrow.”

She did not answer.

“You don’t mind?”

Still she did not answer.

“Do you?” he asked.

“You know whether I mind or not.”

“I don’t see why you should. I have plenty of meals there.”

“You do.”

“Then why do you begrudge them tea?”

“I begrudge whom tea?”

“What are you so horrid for?”

“Oh, say no more! You’ve asked her to tea, it’s quite sufficient. She’ll come.”

He was very angry with his mother. He knew it was merely Miriam she objected to. He flung off his boots and went to bed.

Paul went to meet his friends the next afternoon. He was glad to see them coming. They arrived home at about four o’clock. Everywhere was clean and still for Sunday afternoon. Mrs. Morel sat in her black dress and black apron. She rose to meet the visitors. With Edgar she was cordial, but with Miriam cold and rather grudging. Yet Paul thought the girl looked so nice in her brown cashmere frock.

He helped his mother to get the tea ready. Miriam would have gladly proffered, but was afraid. He was rather proud of his home. There was about it now, he thought, a certain distinction. The chairs were only wooden, and the sofa was old. But the hearthrug and cushions were cosy; the pictures were prints in good taste; there was a simplicity in everything, and plenty of books. He was never ashamed in the least of his home, nor was Miriam of hers, because both were what they should be, and warm. And then he was proud of the table; the china was pretty, the cloth was fine. It did not matter that the spoons were not silver nor the knives ivory-handled; everything looked nice. Mrs. Morel had managed wonderfully while her children were growing up, so that nothing was out of place.

Miriam talked books a little. That was her unfailing topic. But Mrs. Morel was not cordial, and turned soon to Edgar.

At first Edgar and Miriam used to go into Mrs. Morel’s pew. Morel never went to chapel, preferring the public-house. Mrs. Morel, like a little champion, sat at the head of her pew, Paul at the other end; and at first Miriam sat next to him. Then the chapel was like home. It was a pretty place, with dark pews and slim, elegant pillars, and flowers. And the same people had sat in the same places ever since he was a boy. It was wonderfully sweet and soothing to sit there for an hour and a half, next to Miriam, and near to his mother, uniting his two loves under the spell of the place of worship. Then he felt warm and happy and religious at once. And after chapel he walked home with Miriam, whilst Mrs. Morel spent the rest of the evening with her old friend, Mrs. Burns. He was keenly alive on his walks on Sunday nights with Edgar and Miriam. He never went past the pits at night, by the lighted lamp-house, the tall black headstocks and lines of trucks, past the fans spinning slowly like shadows, without the feeling of Miriam returning to him, keen and almost unbearable.

She did not very long occupy the Morels’ pew. Her father took one for themselves once more. It was under the little gallery, opposite the Morels’. When Paul and his mother came in the chapel the Leivers’s pew was always empty. He was anxious for fear she would not come: it was so far, and there were so many rainy Sundays. Then, often very late indeed, she came in, with her long stride, her head bowed, her face hidden under her hat of dark green velvet. Her face, as she sat opposite, was always in shadow. But it gave him a very keen feeling, as if all his soul stirred within him, to see her there. It was not the same glow, happiness, and pride, that he felt in having his mother in charge: something more wonderful, less human, and tinged to intensity by a pain, as if there were something he could not get to.

At this time he was beginning to question the orthodox creed. He was twenty-one, and she was twenty. She was beginning to dread the spring: he became so wild, and hurt her so much. All the way he went cruelly smashing her beliefs. Edgar enjoyed it. He was by nature critical and rather dispassionate. But Miriam suffered exquisite pain, as, with an intellect like a knife, the man she loved examined her religion in which she lived and moved and had her being. But he did not spare her. He was cruel. And when they went alone he was even more fierce, as if he would kill her soul. He bled her beliefs till she almost lost consciousness.

“She exults—she exults as she carries him off from me,” Mrs. Morel cried in her heart when Paul had gone. “She’s not like an ordinary woman, who can leave me my share in him. She wants to absorb him. She wants to draw him out and absorb him till there is nothing left of him, even for himself. He will never be a man on his own feet—she will suck him up.” So the mother sat, and battled and brooded bitterly.

And he, coming home from his walks with Miriam, was wild with torture. He walked biting his lips and with clenched fists, going at a great rate. Then, brought up against a stile, he stood for some minutes, and did not move. There was a great hollow of darkness fronting him, and on the black upslopes patches of tiny lights, and in the lowest trough of the night, a flare of the pit. It was all weird and dreadful. Why was he torn so, almost bewildered, and unable to move? Why did his mother sit at home and suffer? He knew she suffered badly. But why should she? And why did he hate Miriam, and feel so cruel towards her, at the thought of his mother. If Miriam caused his mother suffering, then he hated her—and he easily hated her. Why did she make him feel as if he were uncertain of himself, insecure, an indefinite thing, as if he had not sufficient sheathing to prevent the night and the space breaking into him? How he hated her! And then, what a rush of tenderness and humility!

Suddenly he plunged on again, running home. His mother saw on him the marks of some agony, and she said nothing. But he had to make her talk to him. Then she was angry with him for going so far with Miriam.

“Why don’t you like her, mother?” he cried in despair.

“I don’t know, my boy,” she replied piteously. “I’m sure I’ve tried to like her. I’ve tried and tried, but I can’t—I can’t!”

And he felt dreary and hopeless between the two.

Spring was the worst time. He was changeable, and intense and cruel. So he decided to stay away from her. Then came the hours when he knew Miriam was expecting him. His mother watched him growing restless. He could not go on with his work. He could do nothing. It was as if something were drawing his soul out towards Willey Farm. Then he put on his hat and went, saying nothing. And his mother knew he was gone. And as soon as he was on the way he sighed with relief. And when he was with her he was cruel again.

One day in March he lay on the bank of Nethermere, with Miriam sitting beside him. It was a glistening, white-and-blue day. Big clouds, so brilliant, went by overhead, while shadows stole along on the water. The clear spaces in the sky were of clean, cold blue. Paul lay on his back in the old grass, looking up. He could not bear to look at Miriam. She seemed to want him, and he resisted. He resisted all the time. He wanted now to give her passion and tenderness, and he could not. He felt that she wanted the soul out of his body, and not him. All his strength and energy she drew into herself through some channel which united them. She did not want to meet him, so that there were two of them, man and woman together. She wanted to draw all of him into her. It urged him to an intensity like madness, which fascinated him, as drug-taking might.

He was discussing Michael Angelo. It felt to her as if she were fingering the very quivering tissue, the very protoplasm of life, as she heard him. It gave her deepest satisfaction. And in the end it frightened her. There he lay in the white intensity of his search, and his voice gradually filled her with fear, so level it was, almost inhuman, as if in a trance.

“Don’t talk any more,” she pleaded softly, laying her hand on his forehead.

He lay quite still, almost unable to move. His body was somewhere discarded.

“Why not? Are you tired?”

“Yes, and it wears you out.”

He laughed shortly, realising.

“Yet you always make me like it,” he said.

“I don’t wish to,” she said, very low.

“Not when you’ve gone too far, and you feel you can’t bear it. But your unconscious self always asks it of me. And I suppose I want it.”

He went on, in his dead fashion:

“If only you could want me, and not want what I can reel off for you!”

“I!” she cried bitterly—“I! Why, when would you let me take you?”

“Then it’s my fault,” he said, and, gathering himself together, he got up and began to talk trivialities. He felt insubstantial. In a vague way he hated her for it. And he knew he was as much to blame himself. This, however, did not prevent his hating her.

One evening about this time he had walked along the home road with her. They stood by the pasture leading down to the wood, unable to part. As the stars came out the clouds closed. They had glimpses of their own constellation, Orion, towards the west. His jewels glimmered for a moment, his dog ran low, struggling with difficulty through the spume of cloud.

Orion was for them chief in significance among the constellations. They had gazed at him in their strange, surcharged hours of feeling, until they seemed themselves to live in every one of his stars. This evening Paul had been moody and perverse. Orion had seemed just an ordinary constellation to him. He had fought against his glamour and fascination. Miriam was watching her lover’s mood carefully. But he said nothing that gave him away, till the moment came to part, when he stood frowning gloomily at the gathered clouds, behind which the great constellation must be striding still.

There was to be a little party at his house the next day, at which she was to attend.

“I shan’t come and meet you,” he said.

“Oh, very well; it’s not very nice out,” she replied slowly.

“It’s not that—only they don’t like me to. They say I care more for you than for them. And you understand, don’t you? You know it’s only friendship.”

Miriam was astonished and hurt for him. It had cost him an effort. She left him, wanting to spare him any further humiliation. A fine rain blew in her face as she walked along the road. She was hurt deep down; and she despised him for being blown about by any wind of authority. And in her heart of hearts, unconsciously, she felt that he was trying to get away from her. This she would never have acknowledged. She pitied him.

At this time Paul became an important factor in Jordan’s warehouse. Mr. Pappleworth left to set up a business of his own, and Paul remained with Mr. Jordan as Spiral overseer. His wages were to be raised to thirty shillings at the year-end, if things went well.

Still on Friday night Miriam often came down for her French lesson. Paul did not go so frequently to Willey Farm, and she grieved at the thought of her education’s coming to end; moreover, they both loved to be together, in spite of discords. So they read Balzac, and did compositions, and felt highly cultured.

Friday night was reckoning night for the miners. Morel “reckoned”—shared up the money of the stall—either in the New Inn at Bretty or in his own house, according as his fellow-butties wished. Barker had turned a non-drinker, so now the men reckoned at Morel’s house.

Annie, who had been teaching away, was at home again. She was still a tomboy; and she was engaged to be married. Paul was studying design.

Morel was always in good spirits on Friday evening, unless the week’s earnings were small. He bustled immediately after his dinner, prepared to get washed. It was decorum for the women to absent themselves while the men reckoned. Women were not supposed to spy into such a masculine privacy as the butties’ reckoning, nor were they to know the exact amount of the week’s earnings. So, whilst her father was spluttering in the scullery, Annie went out to spend an hour with a neighbour. Mrs. Morel attended to her baking.

“Shut that doo-er!” bawled Morel furiously.

Annie banged it behind her, and was gone.

“If tha oppens it again while I’m weshin’ me, I’ll ma’e thy jaw rattle,” he threatened from the midst of his soap-suds. Paul and the mother frowned to hear him.

Presently he came running out of the scullery, with the soapy water dripping from him, dithering with cold.

“Oh, my sirs!” he said. “Wheer’s my towel?”

It was hung on a chair to warm before the fire, otherwise he would have bullied and blustered. He squatted on his heels before the hot baking-fire to dry himself.

“F-ff-f!” he went, pretending to shudder with cold.

“Goodness, man, don’t be such a kid!” said Mrs. Morel. “It’s not cold.”

“Thee strip thysen stark nak’d to wesh thy flesh i’ that scullery,” said the miner, as he rubbed his hair; “nowt b’r a ice-’ouse!”

“And I shouldn’t make that fuss,” replied his wife.

“No, tha’d drop down stiff, as dead as a door-knob, wi’ thy nesh sides.”

“Why is a door-knob deader than anything else?” asked Paul, curious.

“Eh, I dunno; that’s what they say,” replied his father. “But there’s that much draught i’ yon scullery, as it blows through your ribs like through a five-barred gate.”

“It would have some difficulty in blowing through yours,” said Mrs. Morel.

Morel looked down ruefully at his sides.

“Me!” he exclaimed. “I’m nowt b’r a skinned rabbit. My bones fair juts out on me.”

“I should like to know where,” retorted his wife.

“Iv’ry-wheer! I’m nobbut a sack o’ faggots.”

Mrs. Morel laughed. He had still a wonderfully young body, muscular, without any fat. His skin was smooth and clear. It might have been the body of a man of twenty-eight, except that there were, perhaps, too many blue scars, like tattoo-marks, where the coal-dust remained under the skin, and that his chest was too hairy. But he put his hand on his side ruefully. It was his fixed belief that, because he did not get fat, he was as thin as a starved rat. Paul looked at his father’s thick, brownish hands all scarred, with broken nails, rubbing the fine smoothness of his sides, and the incongruity struck him. It seemed strange they were the same flesh.

“I suppose,” he said to his father, “you had a good figure once.”

“Eh!” exclaimed the miner, glancing round, startled and timid, like a child.

“He had,” exclaimed Mrs. Morel, “if he didn’t hurtle himself up as if he was trying to get in the smallest space he could.”

“Me!” exclaimed Morel—“me a good figure! I wor niver much more n’r a skeleton.”

“Man!” cried his wife, “don’t be such a pulamiter!”

“‘Strewth!” he said. “Tha’s niver knowed me but what I looked as if I wor goin’ off in a rapid decline.”

She sat and laughed.

“You’ve had a constitution like iron,” she said; “and never a man had a better start, if it was body that counted. You should have seen him as a young man,” she cried suddenly to Paul, drawing herself up to imitate her husband’s once handsome bearing.

Morel watched her shyly. He saw again the passion she had had for him. It blazed upon her for a moment. He was shy, rather scared, and humble. Yet again he felt his old glow. And then immediately he felt the ruin he had made during these years. He wanted to bustle about, to run away from it.

“Gi’e my back a bit of a wesh,” he asked her.

His wife brought a well-soaped flannel and clapped it on his shoulders. He gave a jump.

“Eh, tha mucky little ’ussy!” he cried. “Cowd as death!”

“You ought to have been a salamander,” she laughed, washing his back. It was very rarely she would do anything so personal for him. The children did those things.

“The next world won’t be half hot enough for you,” she added.

“No,” he said; “tha’lt see as it’s draughty for me.”

But she had finished. She wiped him in a desultory fashion, and went upstairs, returning immediately with his shifting-trousers. When he was dried he struggled into his shirt. Then, ruddy and shiny, with hair on end, and his flannelette shirt hanging over his pit-trousers, he stood warming the garments he was going to put on. He turned them, he pulled them inside out, he scorched them.

“Goodness, man!” cried Mrs. Morel, “get dressed!”

“Should thee like to clap thysen into britches as cowd as a tub o’ water?” he said.

At last he took off his pit-trousers and donned decent black. He did all this on the hearthrug, as he would have done if Annie and her familiar friends had been present.

Mrs. Morel turned the bread in the oven. Then from the red earthenware panchion of dough that stood in a corner she took another handful of paste, worked it to the proper shape, and dropped it into a tin. As she was doing so Barker knocked and entered. He was a quiet, compact little man, who looked as if he would go through a stone wall. His black hair was cropped short, his head was bony. Like most miners, he was pale, but healthy and taut.

“Evenin’, missis,” he nodded to Mrs. Morel, and he seated himself with a sigh.

“Good-evening,” she replied cordially.

“Tha’s made thy heels crack,” said Morel.

“I dunno as I have,” said Barker.

He sat, as the men always did in Morel’s kitchen, effacing himself rather.

“How’s missis?” she asked of him.

He had told her some time back:

“We’re expectin’ us third just now, you see.”

“Well,” he answered, rubbing his head, “she keeps pretty middlin’, I think.”

“Let’s see—when?” asked Mrs. Morel.

“Well, I shouldn’t be surprised any time now.”

“Ah! And she’s kept fairly?”

“Yes, tidy.”

“That’s a blessing, for she’s none too strong.”

“No. An’ I’ve done another silly trick.”

“What’s that?”

Mrs. Morel knew Barker wouldn’t do anything very silly.

“I’m come be-out th’ market-bag.”

“You can have mine.”

“Nay, you’ll be wantin’ that yourself.”

“I shan’t. I take a string bag always.”

She saw the determined little collier buying in the week’s groceries and meat on the Friday nights, and she admired him. “Barker’s little, but he’s ten times the man you are,” she said to her husband.

Just then Wesson entered. He was thin, rather frail-looking, with a boyish ingenuousness and a slightly foolish smile, despite his seven children. But his wife was a passionate woman.

“I see you’ve kested me,” he said, smiling rather vapidly.

“Yes,” replied Barker.

The newcomer took off his cap and his big woollen muffler. His nose was pointed and red.

“I’m afraid you’re cold, Mr. Wesson,” said Mrs. Morel.

“It’s a bit nippy,” he replied.

“Then come to the fire.”

“Nay, I s’ll do where I am.”

Both colliers sat away back. They could not be induced to come on to the hearth. The hearth is sacred to the family.

“Go thy ways i’ th’ armchair,” cried Morel cheerily.

“Nay, thank yer; I’m very nicely here.”

“Yes, come, of course,” insisted Mrs. Morel.

He rose and went awkwardly. He sat in Morel’s armchair awkwardly. It was too great a familiarity. But the fire made him blissfully happy.

“And how’s that chest of yours?” demanded Mrs. Morel.

He smiled again, with his blue eyes rather sunny.

“Oh, it’s very middlin’,” he said.

“Wi’ a rattle in it like a kettle-drum,” said Barker shortly.

“T-t-t-t!” went Mrs. Morel rapidly with her tongue. “Did you have that flannel singlet made?”

“Not yet,” he smiled.

“Then, why didn’t you?” she cried.

“It’ll come,” he smiled.

“Ah, an’ Doomsday!” exclaimed Barker.

Barker and Morel were both impatient of Wesson. But, then, they were both as hard as nails, physically.

When Morel was nearly ready he pushed the bag of money to Paul.

“Count it, boy,” he asked humbly.

Paul impatiently turned from his books and pencil, tipped the bag upside down on the table. There was a five-pound bag of silver, sovereigns and loose money. He counted quickly, referred to the checks—the written papers giving amount of coal—put the money in order. Then Barker glanced at the checks.

Mrs. Morel went upstairs, and the three men came to table. Morel, as master of the house, sat in his armchair, with his back to the hot fire. The two butties had cooler seats. None of them counted the money.

“What did we say Simpson’s was?” asked Morel; and the butties cavilled for a minute over the dayman’s earnings. Then the amount was put aside.

“An’ Bill Naylor’s?”

This money also was taken from the pack.

Then, because Wesson lived in one of the company’s houses, and his rent had been deducted, Morel and Barker took four-and-six each. And because Morel’s coals had come, and the leading was stopped, Barker and Wesson took four shillings each. Then it was plain sailing. Morel gave each of them a sovereign till there were no more sovereigns; each half a crown till there were no more half-crowns; each a shilling till there were no more shillings. If there was anything at the end that wouldn’t split, Morel took it and stood drinks.

Then the three men rose and went. Morel scuttled out of the house before his wife came down. She heard the door close, and descended. She looked hastily at the bread in the oven. Then, glancing on the table, she saw her money lying. Paul had been working all the time. But now he felt his mother counting the week’s money, and her wrath rising,

“T-t-t-t-t!” went her tongue.

He frowned. He could not work when she was cross. She counted again.

“A measly twenty-five shillings!” she exclaimed. “How much was the cheque?”

“Ten pounds eleven,” said Paul irritably. He dreaded what was coming.

“And he gives me a scrattlin’ twenty-five, an’ his club this week! But I know him. He thinks because you’re earning he needn’t keep the house any longer. No, all he has to do with his money is to guttle it. But I’ll show him!”

“Oh, mother, don’t!” cried Paul.

“Don’t what, I should like to know?” she exclaimed.

“Don’t carry on again. I can’t work.”

She went very quiet.

“Yes, it’s all very well,” she said; “but how do you think I’m going to manage?”

“Well, it won’t make it any better to whittle about it.”

“I should like to know what you’d do if you had it to put up with.”

“It won’t be long. You can have my money. Let him go to hell.”

He went back to his work, and she tied her bonnet-strings grimly. When she was fretted he could not bear it. But now he began to insist on her recognising him.

“The two loaves at the top,” she said, “will be done in twenty minutes. Don’t forget them.”

“All right,” he answered; and she went to market.

He remained alone working. But his usual intense concentration became unsettled. He listened for the yard-gate. At a quarter-past seven came a low knock, and Miriam entered.

“All alone?” she said.

“Yes.”

As if at home, she took off her tam-o’-shanter and her long coat, hanging them up. It gave him a thrill. This might be their own house, his and hers. Then she came back and peered over his work.

“What is it?” she asked.

“Still design, for decorating stuffs, and for embroidery.”

She bent short-sightedly over the drawings.

It irritated him that she peered so into everything that was his, searching him out. He went into the parlour and returned with a bundle of brownish linen. Carefully unfolding it, he spread it on the floor. It proved to be a curtain or portière, beautifully stencilled with a design on roses.

“Ah, how beautiful!” she cried.

The spread cloth, with its wonderful reddish roses and dark green stems, all so simple, and somehow so wicked-looking, lay at her feet. She went on her knees before it, her dark curls dropping. He saw her crouched voluptuously before his work, and his heart beat quickly. Suddenly she looked up at him.

“Why does it seem cruel?” she asked.

“What?”

“There seems a feeling of cruelty about it,” she said.

“It’s jolly good, whether or not,” he replied, folding up his work with a lover’s hands.

She rose slowly, pondering.

“And what will you do with it?” she asked.

“Send it to Liberty’s. I did it for my mother, but I think she’d rather have the money.”

“Yes,” said Miriam. He had spoken with a touch of bitterness, and Miriam sympathised. Money would have been nothing to her.

He took the cloth back into the parlour. When he returned he threw to Miriam a smaller piece. It was a cushion-cover with the same design.

“I did that for you,” he said.

She fingered the work with trembling hands, and did not speak. He became embarrassed.

“By Jove, the bread!” he cried.

He took the top loaves out, tapped them vigorously. They were done. He put them on the hearth to cool. Then he went to the scullery, wetted his hands, scooped the last white dough out of the punchion, and dropped it in a baking-tin. Miriam was still bent over her painted cloth. He stood rubbing the bits of dough from his hands.

“You do like it?” he asked.

She looked up at him, with her dark eyes one flame of love. He laughed uncomfortably. Then he began to talk about the design. There was for him the most intense pleasure in talking about his work to Miriam. All his passion, all his wild blood, went into this intercourse with her, when he talked and conceived his work. She brought forth to him his imaginations. She did not understand, any more than a woman understands when she conceives a child in her womb. But this was life for her and for him.

While they were talking, a young woman of about twenty-two, small and pale, hollow-eyed, yet with a relentless look about her, entered the room. She was a friend at the Morel’s.

“Take your things off,” said Paul.

“No, I’m not stopping.”

She sat down in the armchair opposite Paul and Miriam, who were on the sofa. Miriam moved a little farther from him. The room was hot, with a scent of new bread. Brown, crisp loaves stood on the hearth.

“I shouldn’t have expected to see you here to-night, Miriam Leivers,” said Beatrice wickedly.

“Why not?” murmured Miriam huskily.

“Why, let’s look at your shoes.”

Miriam remained uncomfortably still.

“If tha doesna tha durs’na,” laughed Beatrice.

Miriam put her feet from under her dress. Her boots had that queer, irresolute, rather pathetic look about them, which showed how self-conscious and self-mistrustful she was. And they were covered with mud.

“Glory! You’re a positive muck-heap,” exclaimed Beatrice. “Who cleans your boots?”

“I clean them myself.”

“Then you wanted a job,” said Beatrice. “It would ha’ taken a lot of men to ha’ brought me down here to-night. But love laughs at sludge, doesn’t it, ’Postle my duck?”

“Inter alia,” he said.

“Oh, Lord! are you going to spout foreign languages? What does it mean, Miriam?”

There was a fine sarcasm in the last question, but Miriam did not see it.

“‘Among other things,’ I believe,” she said humbly.

Beatrice put her tongue between her teeth and laughed wickedly.

“‘Among other things,’ ’Postle?” she repeated. “Do you mean love laughs at mothers, and fathers, and sisters, and brothers, and men friends, and lady friends, and even at the b’loved himself?”

She affected a great innocence.

“In fact, it’s one big smile,” he replied.

“Up its sleeve, ’Postle Morel—you believe me,” she said; and she went off into another burst of wicked, silent laughter.

Miriam sat silent, withdrawn into herself. Every one of Paul’s friends delighted in taking sides against her, and he left her in the lurch—seemed almost to have a sort of revenge upon her then.

“Are you still at school?” asked Miriam of Beatrice.

“Yes.”

“You’ve not had your notice, then?”

“I expect it at Easter.”

“Isn’t it an awful shame, to turn you off merely because you didn’t pass the exam?”

“I don’t know,” said Beatrice coldly.

“Agatha says you’re as good as any teacher anywhere. It seems to me ridiculous. I wonder why you didn’t pass.”

“Short of brains, eh, ’Postle?” said Beatrice briefly.

“Only brains to bite with,” replied Paul, laughing.

“Nuisance!” she cried; and, springing from her seat, she rushed and boxed his ears. She had beautiful small hands. He held her wrists while she wrestled with him. At last she broke free, and seized two handfuls of his thick, dark brown hair, which she shook.

“Beat!” he said, as he pulled his hair straight with his fingers. “I hate you!”

She laughed with glee.

“Mind!” she said. “I want to sit next to you.”

“I’d as lief be neighbours with a vixen,” he said, nevertheless making place for her between him and Miriam.

“Did it ruffle his pretty hair, then!” she cried; and, with her hair-comb, she combed him straight. “And his nice little moustache!” she exclaimed. She tilted his head back and combed his young moustache. “It’s a wicked moustache, ’Postle,” she said. “It’s a red for danger. Have you got any of those cigarettes?”

He pulled his cigarette-case from his pocket. Beatrice looked inside it.

“And fancy me having Connie’s last cig.,” said Beatrice, putting the thing between her teeth. He held a lit match to her, and she puffed daintily.

“Thanks so much, darling,” she said mockingly.

It gave her a wicked delight.

“Don’t you think he does it nicely, Miriam?” she asked.

“Oh, very!” said Miriam.

He took a cigarette for himself.

“Light, old boy?” said Beatrice, tilting her cigarette at him.

He bent forward to her to light his cigarette at hers. She was winking at him as he did so. Miriam saw his eyes trembling with mischief, and his full, almost sensual, mouth quivering. He was not himself, and she could not bear it. As he was now, she had no connection with him; she might as well not have existed. She saw the cigarette dancing on his full red lips. She hated his thick hair for being tumbled loose on his forehead.

“Sweet boy!” said Beatrice, tipping up his chin and giving him a little kiss on the cheek.

“I s’ll kiss thee back, Beat,” he said.

“Tha wunna!” she giggled, jumping up and going away. “Isn’t he shameless, Miriam?”

“Quite,” said Miriam. “By the way, aren’t you forgetting the bread?”

“By Jove!” he cried, flinging open the oven door.

Out puffed the bluish smoke and a smell of burned bread.

“Oh, golly!” cried Beatrice, coming to his side. He crouched before the oven, she peered over his shoulder. “This is what comes of the oblivion of love, my boy.”

Paul was ruefully removing the loaves. One was burnt black on the hot side; another was hard as a brick.

“Poor mater!” said Paul.

“You want to grate it,” said Beatrice. “Fetch me the nutmeg-grater.”

She arranged the bread in the oven. He brought the grater, and she grated the bread on to a newspaper on the table. He set the doors open to blow away the smell of burned bread. Beatrice grated away, puffing her cigarette, knocking the charcoal off the poor loaf.

“My word, Miriam! you’re in for it this time,” said Beatrice.

“I!” exclaimed Miriam in amazement.

“You’d better be gone when his mother comes in. I know why King Alfred burned the cakes. Now I see it! ’Postle would fix up a tale about his work making him forget, if he thought it would wash. If that old woman had come in a bit sooner, she’d have boxed the brazen thing’s ears who made the oblivion, instead of poor Alfred’s.”

She giggled as she scraped the loaf. Even Miriam laughed in spite of herself. Paul mended the fire ruefully.

The garden gate was heard to bang.

“Quick!” cried Beatrice, giving Paul the scraped loaf. “Wrap it up in a damp towel.”

Paul disappeared into the scullery. Beatrice hastily blew her scrapings into the fire, and sat down innocently. Annie came bursting in. She was an abrupt, quite smart young woman. She blinked in the strong light.

“Smell of burning!” she exclaimed.

“It’s the cigarettes,” replied Beatrice demurely.

“Where’s Paul?”

Leonard had followed Annie. He had a long comic face and blue eyes, very sad.

“I suppose he’s left you to settle it between you,” he said. He nodded sympathetically to Miriam, and became gently sarcastic to Beatrice.

“No,” said Beatrice, “he’s gone off with number nine.”

“I just met number five inquiring for him,” said Leonard.

“Yes—we’re going to share him up like Solomon’s baby,” said Beatrice.

Annie laughed.

“Oh, ay,” said Leonard. “And which bit should you have?”

“I don’t know,” said Beatrice. “I’ll let all the others pick first.”

“An’ you’d have the leavings, like?” said Leonard, twisting up a comic face.

Annie was looking in the oven. Miriam sat ignored. Paul entered.

“This bread’s a fine sight, our Paul,” said Annie.

“Then you should stop an’ look after it,” said Paul.

“You mean you should do what you’re reckoning to do,” replied Annie.

“He should, shouldn’t he!” cried Beatrice.

“I s’d think he’d got plenty on hand,” said Leonard.

“You had a nasty walk, didn’t you, Miriam?” said Annie.

“Yes—but I’d been in all week—”

“And you wanted a bit of a change, like,” insinuated Leonard kindly.

“Well, you can’t be stuck in the house for ever,” Annie agreed. She was quite amiable. Beatrice pulled on her coat, and went out with Leonard and Annie. She would meet her own boy.

“Don’t forget that bread, our Paul,” cried Annie. “Good-night, Miriam. I don’t think it will rain.”

When they had all gone, Paul fetched the swathed loaf, unwrapped it, and surveyed it sadly.

“It’s a mess!” he said.

“But,” answered Miriam impatiently, “what is it, after all—twopence, ha’penny.”

“Yes, but—it’s the mater’s precious baking, and she’ll take it to heart. However, it’s no good bothering.”

He took the loaf back into the scullery. There was a little distance between him and Miriam. He stood balanced opposite her for some moments considering, thinking of his behaviour with Beatrice. He felt guilty inside himself, and yet glad. For some inscrutable reason it served Miriam right. He was not going to repent. She wondered what he was thinking of as he stood suspended. His thick hair was tumbled over his forehead. Why might she not push it back for him, and remove the marks of Beatrice’s comb? Why might she not press his body with her two hands. It looked so firm, and every whit living. And he would let other girls, why not her?

Suddenly he started into life. It made her quiver almost with terror as he quickly pushed the hair off his forehead and came towards her.

“Half-past eight!” he said. “We’d better buck up. Where’s your French?”

Miriam shyly and rather bitterly produced her exercise-book. Every week she wrote for him a sort of diary of her inner life, in her own French. He had found this was the only way to get her to do compositions. And her diary was mostly a love-letter. He would read it now; she felt as if her soul’s history were going to be desecrated by him in his present mood. He sat beside her. She watched his hand, firm and warm, rigorously scoring her work. He was reading only the French, ignoring her soul that was there. But gradually his hand forgot its work. He read in silence, motionless. She quivered.

“‘Ce matin les oiseaux m’ont éveillé,’” he read. “‘Il faisait encore un crépuscule. Mais la petite fenêtre de ma chambre était blême, et puis, jaûne, et tous les oiseaux du bois éclatèrent dans un chanson vif et résonnant. Toute l’aûbe tressaillit. J’avais rêvé de vous. Est-ce que vous voyez aussi l’aûbe? Les oiseaux m’éveillent presque tous les matins, et toujours il y a quelque chose de terreur dans le cri des grives. Il est si clair—’”

Miriam sat tremulous, half ashamed. He remained quite still, trying to understand. He only knew she loved him. He was afraid of her love for him. It was too good for him, and he was inadequate. His own love was at fault, not hers. Ashamed, he corrected her work, humbly writing above her words.

“Look,” he said quietly, “the past participle conjugated with avoir agrees with the direct object when it precedes.”

She bent forward, trying to see and to understand. Her free, fine curls tickled his face. He started as if they had been red hot, shuddering. He saw her peering forward at the page, her red lips parted piteously, the black hair springing in fine strands across her tawny, ruddy cheek. She was coloured like a pomegranate for richness. His breath came short as he watched her. Suddenly she looked up at him. Her dark eyes were naked with their love, afraid, and yearning. His eyes, too, were dark, and they hurt her. They seemed to master her. She lost all her self-control, was exposed in fear. And he knew, before he could kiss her, he must drive something out of himself. And a touch of hate for her crept back again into his heart. He returned to her exercise.

Suddenly he flung down the pencil, and was at the oven in a leap, turning the bread. For Miriam he was too quick. She started violently, and it hurt her with real pain. Even the way he crouched before the oven hurt her. There seemed to be something cruel in it, something cruel in the swift way he pitched the bread out of the tins, caught it up again. If only he had been gentle in his movements she would have felt so rich and warm. As it was, she was hurt.

He returned and finished the exercise.

“You’ve done well this week,” he said.

She saw he was flattered by her diary. It did not repay her entirely.

“You really do blossom out sometimes,” he said. “You ought to write poetry.”

She lifted her head with joy, then she shook it mistrustfully.

“I don’t trust myself,” she said.

“You should try!”

Again she shook her head.

“Shall we read, or is it too late?” he asked.

“It is late—but we can read just a little,” she pleaded.

She was really getting now the food for her life during the next week. He made her copy Baudelaire’s “Le Balcon”. Then he read it for her. His voice was soft and caressing, but growing almost brutal. He had a way of lifting his lips and showing his teeth, passionately and bitterly, when he was much moved. This he did now. It made Miriam feel as if he were trampling on her. She dared not look at him, but sat with her head bowed. She could not understand why he got into such a tumult and fury. It made her wretched. She did not like Baudelaire, on the whole—nor Verlaine.

“Behold her singing in the field Yon solitary highland lass.”

That nourished her heart. So did “Fair Ines”. And—

“It was a beauteous evening, calm and pure, And breathing holy quiet like a nun.”

These were like herself. And there was he, saying in his throat bitterly:

“Tu te rappelleras la beaûté des caresses.”

The poem was finished; he took the bread out of the oven, arranging the burnt loaves at the bottom of the panchion, the good ones at the top. The desiccated loaf remained swathed up in the scullery.

“Mater needn’t know till morning,” he said. “It won’t upset her so much then as at night.”

Miriam looked in the bookcase, saw what postcards and letters he had received, saw what books were there. She took one that had interested him. Then he turned down the gas and they set off. He did not trouble to lock the door.

He was not home again until a quarter to eleven. His mother was seated in the rocking-chair. Annie, with a rope of hair hanging down her back, remained sitting on a low stool before the fire, her elbows on her knees, gloomily. On the table stood the offending loaf unswathed. Paul entered rather breathless. No one spoke. His mother was reading the little local newspaper. He took off his coat, and went to sit down on the sofa. His mother moved curtly aside to let him pass. No one spoke. He was very uncomfortable. For some minutes he sat pretending to read a piece of paper he found on the table. Then—

“I forgot that bread, mother,” he said.

There was no answer from either woman.

“Well,” he said, “it’s only twopence ha’penny. I can pay you for that.”

Being angry, he put three pennies on the table and slid them towards his mother. She turned away her head. Her mouth was shut tightly.

“Yes,” said Annie, “you don’t know how badly my mother is!”

The girl sat staring glumly into the fire.

“Why is she badly?” asked Paul, in his overbearing way.

“Well!” said Annie. “She could scarcely get home.”

He looked closely at his mother. She looked ill.

“Why could you scarcely get home?” he asked her, still sharply. She would not answer.

“I found her as white as a sheet sitting here,” said Annie, with a suggestion of tears in her voice.

“Well, why?” insisted Paul. His brows were knitting, his eyes dilating passionately.

“It was enough to upset anybody,” said Mrs. Morel, “hugging those parcels—meat, and green-groceries, and a pair of curtains—”

“Well, why did you hug them; you needn’t have done.”

“Then who would?”

“Let Annie fetch the meat.”

“Yes, and I would fetch the meat, but how was I to know. You were off with Miriam, instead of being in when my mother came.”

“And what was the matter with you?” asked Paul of his mother.

“I suppose it’s my heart,” she replied. Certainly she looked bluish round the mouth.

“And have you felt it before?”

“Yes—often enough.”

“Then why haven’t you told me?—and why haven’t you seen a doctor?”

Mrs. Morel shifted in her chair, angry with him for his hectoring.

“You’d never notice anything,” said Annie. “You’re too eager to be off with Miriam.”

“Oh, am I—and any worse than you with Leonard?”

“I was in at a quarter to ten.”

There was silence in the room for a time.

“I should have thought,” said Mrs. Morel bitterly, “that she wouldn’t have occupied you so entirely as to burn a whole ovenful of bread.”

“Beatrice was here as well as she.”

“Very likely. But we know why the bread is spoilt.”

“Why?” he flashed.

“Because you were engrossed with Miriam,” replied Mrs. Morel hotly.

“Oh, very well—then it was not!” he replied angrily.

He was distressed and wretched. Seizing a paper, he began to read. Annie, her blouse unfastened, her long ropes of hair twisted into a plait, went up to bed, bidding him a very curt good-night.

Paul sat pretending to read. He knew his mother wanted to upbraid him. He also wanted to know what had made her ill, for he was troubled. So, instead of running away to bed, as he would have liked to do, he sat and waited. There was a tense silence. The clock ticked loudly.

“You’d better go to bed before your father comes in,” said the mother harshly. “And if you’re going to have anything to eat, you’d better get it.”

“I don’t want anything.”

It was his mother’s custom to bring him some trifle for supper on Friday night, the night of luxury for the colliers. He was too angry to go and find it in the pantry this night. This insulted her.

“If I wanted you to go to Selby on Friday night, I can imagine the scene,” said Mrs. Morel. “But you’re never too tired to go if she will come for you. Nay, you neither want to eat nor drink then.”

“I can’t let her go alone.”

“Can’t you? And why does she come?”

“Not because I ask her.”

“She doesn’t come without you want her—”

“Well, what if I do want her—” he replied.

“Why, nothing, if it was sensible or reasonable. But to go trapseing up there miles and miles in the mud, coming home at midnight, and got to go to Nottingham in the morning—”

“If I hadn’t, you’d be just the same.”

“Yes, I should, because there’s no sense in it. Is she so fascinating that you must follow her all that way?” Mrs. Morel was bitterly sarcastic. She sat still, with averted face, stroking with a rhythmic, jerked movement, the black sateen of her apron. It was a movement that hurt Paul to see.

“I do like her,” he said, “but—”

“Like her!” said Mrs. Morel, in the same biting tones. “It seems to me you like nothing and nobody else. There’s neither Annie, nor me, nor anyone now for you.”

“What nonsense, mother—you know I don’t love her—I—I tell you I don’t love her—she doesn’t even walk with my arm, because I don’t want her to.”

“Then why do you fly to her so often?”

“I do like to talk to her—I never said I didn’t. But I don’t love her.”

“Is there nobody else to talk to?”

“Not about the things we talk of. There’s a lot of things that you’re not interested in, that—”

“What things?”

Mrs. Morel was so intense that Paul began to pant.

“Why—painting—and books. You don’t care about Herbert Spencer.”

“No,” was the sad reply. “And you won’t at my age.”

“Well, but I do now—and Miriam does—”

“And how do you know,” Mrs. Morel flashed defiantly, “that I shouldn’t. Do you ever try me!”

“But you don’t, mother, you know you don’t care whether a picture’s decorative or not; you don’t care what manner it is in.”

“How do you know I don’t care? Do you ever try me? Do you ever talk to me about these things, to try?”

“But it’s not that that matters to you, mother, you know it’s not.”

“What is it, then—what is it, then, that matters to me?” she flashed. He knitted his brows with pain.

“You’re old, mother, and we’re young.”

He only meant that the interests of her age were not the interests of his. But he realised the moment he had spoken that he had said the wrong thing.

“Yes, I know it well—I am old. And therefore I may stand aside; I have nothing more to do with you. You only want me to wait on you—the rest is for Miriam.”

He could not bear it. Instinctively he realised that he was life to her. And, after all, she was the chief thing to him, the only supreme thing.

“You know it isn’t, mother, you know it isn’t!”

She was moved to pity by his cry.

“It looks a great deal like it,” she said, half putting aside her despair.

“No, mother—I really don’t love her. I talk to her, but I want to come home to you.”

He had taken off his collar and tie, and rose, bare-throated, to go to bed. As he stooped to kiss his mother, she threw her arms round his neck, hid her face on his shoulder, and cried, in a whimpering voice, so unlike her own that he writhed in agony:

“I can’t bear it. I could let another woman—but not her. She’d leave me no room, not a bit of room—”

And immediately he hated Miriam bitterly.

“And I’ve never—you know, Paul—I’ve never had a husband—not really—”

He stroked his mother’s hair, and his mouth was on her throat.

“And she exults so in taking you from me—she’s not like ordinary girls.”

“Well, I don’t love her, mother,” he murmured, bowing his head and hiding his eyes on her shoulder in misery. His mother kissed him a long, fervent kiss.

“My boy!” she said, in a voice trembling with passionate love.

Without knowing, he gently stroked her face.

“There,” said his mother, “now go to bed. You’ll be so tired in the morning.” As she was speaking she heard her husband coming. “There’s your father—now go.” Suddenly she looked at him almost as if in fear. “Perhaps I’m selfish. If you want her, take her, my boy.”

His mother looked so strange, Paul kissed her, trembling.

“Ha—mother!” he said softly.

Morel came in, walking unevenly. His hat was over one corner of his eye. He balanced in the doorway.

“At your mischief again?” he said venomously.

Mrs. Morel’s emotion turned into sudden hate of the drunkard who had come in thus upon her.

“At any rate, it is sober,” she said.

“H’m—h’m! h’m—h’m!” he sneered. He went into the passage, hung up his hat and coat. Then they heard him go down three steps to the pantry. He returned with a piece of pork-pie in his fist. It was what Mrs. Morel had bought for her son.

“Nor was that bought for you. If you can give me no more than twenty-five shillings, I’m sure I’m not going to buy you pork-pie to stuff, after you’ve swilled a bellyful of beer.”

“Wha-at—wha-at!” snarled Morel, toppling in his balance. “Wha-at—not for me?” He looked at the piece of meat and crust, and suddenly, in a vicious spurt of temper, flung it into the fire.

Paul started to his feet.

“Waste your own stuff!” he cried.

“What—what!” suddenly shouted Morel, jumping up and clenching his fist. “I’ll show yer, yer young jockey!”

“All right!” said Paul viciously, putting his head on one side. “Show me!”

He would at that moment dearly have loved to have a smack at something. Morel was half crouching, fists up, ready to spring. The young man stood, smiling with his lips.

“Ussha!” hissed the father, swiping round with a great stroke just past his son’s face. He dared not, even though so close, really touch the young man, but swerved an inch away.

“Right!” said Paul, his eyes upon the side of his father’s mouth, where in another instant his fist would have hit. He ached for that stroke. But he heard a faint moan from behind. His mother was deadly pale and dark at the mouth. Morel was dancing up to deliver another blow.

“Father!” said Paul, so that the word rang.

Morel started, and stood at attention.

“Mother!” moaned the boy. “Mother!”

She began to struggle with herself. Her open eyes watched him, although she could not move. Gradually she was coming to herself. He laid her down on the sofa, and ran upstairs for a little whisky, which at last she could sip. The tears were hopping down his face. As he kneeled in front of her he did not cry, but the tears ran down his face quickly. Morel, on the opposite side of the room, sat with his elbows on his knees glaring across.

“What’s a-matter with ’er?” he asked.

“Faint!” replied Paul.

“H’m!”

The elderly man began to unlace his boots. He stumbled off to bed. His last fight was fought in that home.

Paul kneeled there, stroking his mother’s hand.

“Don’t be poorly, mother—don’t be poorly!” he said time after time.

“It’s nothing, my boy,” she murmured.

At last he rose, fetched in a large piece of coal, and raked the fire. Then he cleared the room, put everything straight, laid the things for breakfast, and brought his mother’s candle.

“Can you go to bed, mother?”

“Yes, I’ll come.”

“Sleep with Annie, mother, not with him.”

“No. I’ll sleep in my own bed.”

“Don’t sleep with him, mother.”

“I’ll sleep in my own bed.”

She rose, and he turned out the gas, then followed her closely upstairs, carrying her candle. On the landing he kissed her close.

“Good-night, mother.”

“Good-night!” she said.

He pressed his face upon the pillow in a fury of misery. And yet, somewhere in his soul, he was at peace because he still loved his mother best. It was the bitter peace of resignation.

The efforts of his father to conciliate him next day were a great humiliation to him.

Everybody tried to forget the scene.

## CHAPTER IX DEFEAT OF MIRIAM

Paul was dissatisfied with himself and with everything. The deepest of his love belonged to his mother. When he felt he had hurt her, or wounded his love for her, he could not bear it. Now it was spring, and there was battle between him and Miriam. This year he had a good deal against her. She was vaguely aware of it. The old feeling that she was to be a sacrifice to this love, which she had had when she prayed, was mingled in all her emotions. She did not at the bottom believe she ever would have him. She did not believe in herself primarily: doubted whether she could ever be what he would demand of her. Certainly she never saw herself living happily through a lifetime with him. She saw tragedy, sorrow, and sacrifice ahead. And in sacrifice she was proud, in renunciation she was strong, for she did not trust herself to support everyday life. She was prepared for the big things and the deep things, like tragedy. It was the sufficiency of the small day-life she could not trust.

The Easter holidays began happily. Paul was his own frank self. Yet she felt it would go wrong. On the Sunday afternoon she stood at her bedroom window, looking across at the oak-trees of the wood, in whose branches a twilight was tangled, below the bright sky of the afternoon. Grey-green rosettes of honeysuckle leaves hung before the window, some already, she fancied, showing bud. It was spring, which she loved and dreaded.

Hearing the clack of the gate she stood in suspense. It was a bright grey day. Paul came into the yard with his bicycle, which glittered as he walked. Usually he rang his bell and laughed towards the house. To-day he walked with shut lips and cold, cruel bearing, that had something of a slouch and a sneer in it. She knew him well by now, and could tell from that keen-looking, aloof young body of his what was happening inside him. There was a cold correctness in the way he put his bicycle in its place, that made her heart sink.

She came downstairs nervously. She was wearing a new net blouse that she thought became her. It had a high collar with a tiny ruff, reminding her of Mary, Queen of Scots, and making her, she thought, look wonderfully a woman, and dignified. At twenty she was full-breasted and luxuriously formed. Her face was still like a soft rich mask, unchangeable. But her eyes, once lifted, were wonderful. She was afraid of him. He would notice her new blouse.

He, being in a hard, ironical mood, was entertaining the family to a description of a service given in the Primitive Methodist Chapel, conducted by one of the well-known preachers of the sect. He sat at the head of the table, his mobile face, with the eyes that could be so beautiful, shining with tenderness or dancing with laughter, now taking on one expression and then another, in imitation of various people he was mocking. His mockery always hurt her; it was too near the reality. He was too clever and cruel. She felt that when his eyes were like this, hard with mocking hate, he would spare neither himself nor anybody else. But Mrs. Leivers was wiping her eyes with laughter, and Mr. Leivers, just awake from his Sunday nap, was rubbing his head in amusement. The three brothers sat with ruffled, sleepy appearance in their shirt-sleeves, giving a guffaw from time to time. The whole family loved a “take-off” more than anything.

He took no notice of Miriam. Later, she saw him remark her new blouse, saw that the artist approved, but it won from him not a spark of warmth. She was nervous, could hardly reach the teacups from the shelves.

When the men went out to milk, she ventured to address him personally.

“You were late,” she said.

“Was I?” he answered.

There was silence for a while.

“Was it rough riding?” she asked.

“I didn’t notice it.”

She continued quickly to lay the table. When she had finished—

“Tea won’t be for a few minutes. Will you come and look at the daffodils?” she said.

He rose without answering. They went out into the back garden under the budding damson-trees. The hills and the sky were clean and cold. Everything looked washed, rather hard. Miriam glanced at Paul. He was pale and impassive. It seemed cruel to her that his eyes and brows, which she loved, could look so hurting.

“Has the wind made you tired?” she asked. She detected an underneath feeling of weariness about him.

“No, I think not,” he answered.

“It must be rough on the road—the wood moans so.”

“You can see by the clouds it’s a south-west wind; that helps me here.”

“You see, I don’t cycle, so I don’t understand,” she murmured.

“Is there need to cycle to know that!” he said.

She thought his sarcasms were unnecessary. They went forward in silence. Round the wild, tussocky lawn at the back of the house was a thorn hedge, under which daffodils were craning forward from among their sheaves of grey-green blades. The cheeks of the flowers were greenish with cold. But still some had burst, and their gold ruffled and glowed. Miriam went on her knees before one cluster, took a wild-looking daffodil between her hands, turned up its face of gold to her, and bowed down, caressing it with her mouth and cheeks and brow. He stood aside, with his hands in his pockets, watching her. One after another she turned up to him the faces of the yellow, bursten flowers appealingly, fondling them lavishly all the while.

“Aren’t they magnificent?” she murmured.

“Magnificent! It’s a bit thick—they’re pretty!”

She bowed again to her flowers at his censure of her praise. He watched her crouching, sipping the flowers with fervid kisses.

“Why must you always be fondling things?” he said irritably.

“But I love to touch them,” she replied, hurt.

“Can you never like things without clutching them as if you wanted to pull the heart out of them? Why don’t you have a bit more restraint, or reserve, or something?”

She looked up at him full of pain, then continued slowly to stroke her lips against a ruffled flower. Their scent, as she smelled it, was so much kinder than he; it almost made her cry.

“You wheedle the soul out of things,” he said. “I would never wheedle—at any rate, I’d go straight.”

He scarcely knew what he was saying. These things came from him mechanically. She looked at him. His body seemed one weapon, firm and hard against her.

“You’re always begging things to love you,” he said, “as if you were a beggar for love. Even the flowers, you have to fawn on them—”

Rhythmically, Miriam was swaying and stroking the flower with her mouth, inhaling the scent which ever after made her shudder as it came to her nostrils.

“You don’t want to love—your eternal and abnormal craving is to be loved. You aren’t positive, you’re negative. You absorb, absorb, as if you must fill yourself up with love, because you’ve got a shortage somewhere.”

She was stunned by his cruelty, and did not hear. He had not the faintest notion of what he was saying. It was as if his fretted, tortured soul, run hot by thwarted passion, jetted off these sayings like sparks from electricity. She did not grasp anything he said. She only sat crouched beneath his cruelty and his hatred of her. She never realised in a flash. Over everything she brooded and brooded.

After tea he stayed with Edgar and the brothers, taking no notice of Miriam. She, extremely unhappy on this looked-for holiday, waited for him. And at last he yielded and came to her. She was determined to track this mood of his to its origin. She counted it not much more than a mood.

“Shall we go through the wood a little way?” she asked him, knowing he never refused a direct request.

They went down to the warren. On the middle path they passed a trap, a narrow horseshoe hedge of small fir-boughs, baited with the guts of a rabbit. Paul glanced at it frowning. She caught his eye.

“Isn’t it dreadful?” she asked.

“I don’t know! Is it worse than a weasel with its teeth in a rabbit’s throat? One weasel or many rabbits? One or the other must go!”

He was taking the bitterness of life badly. She was rather sorry for him.

“We will go back to the house,” he said. “I don’t want to walk out.”

They went past the lilac-tree, whose bronze leaf-buds were coming unfastened. Just a fragment remained of the haystack, a monument squared and brown, like a pillar of stone. There was a little bed of hay from the last cutting.

“Let us sit here a minute,” said Miriam.

He sat down against his will, resting his back against the hard wall of hay. They faced the amphitheatre of round hills that glowed with sunset, tiny white farms standing out, the meadows golden, the woods dark and yet luminous, tree-tops folded over tree-tops, distinct in the distance. The evening had cleared, and the east was tender with a magenta flush under which the land lay still and rich.

“Isn’t it beautiful?” she pleaded.

But he only scowled. He would rather have had it ugly just then.

At that moment a big bull-terrier came rushing up, open-mouthed, pranced his two paws on the youth’s shoulders, licking his face. Paul drew back, laughing. Bill was a great relief to him. He pushed the dog aside, but it came leaping back.

“Get out,” said the lad, “or I’ll dot thee one.”

But the dog was not to be pushed away. So Paul had a little battle with the creature, pitching poor Bill away from him, who, however, only floundered tumultuously back again, wild with joy. The two fought together, the man laughing grudgingly, the dog grinning all over. Miriam watched them. There was something pathetic about the man. He wanted so badly to love, to be tender. The rough way he bowled the dog over was really loving. Bill got up, panting with happiness, his brown eyes rolling in his white face, and lumbered back again. He adored Paul. The lad frowned.

“Bill, I’ve had enough o’ thee,” he said.

But the dog only stood with two heavy paws, that quivered with love, upon his thigh, and flickered a red tongue at him. He drew back.

“No,” he said—“no—I’ve had enough.”

And in a minute the dog trotted off happily, to vary the fun.

He remained staring miserably across at the hills, whose still beauty he begrudged. He wanted to go and cycle with Edgar. Yet he had not the courage to leave Miriam.

“Why are you sad?” she asked humbly.

“I’m not sad; why should I be,” he answered. “I’m only normal.”

She wondered why he always claimed to be normal when he was disagreeable.

“But what is the matter?” she pleaded, coaxing him soothingly.

“Nothing!”

“Nay!” she murmured.

He picked up a stick and began to stab the earth with it.

“You’d far better not talk,” he said.

“But I wish to know—” she replied.

He laughed resentfully.

“You always do,” he said.

“It’s not fair to me,” she murmured.

He thrust, thrust, thrust at the ground with the pointed stick, digging up little clods of earth as if he were in a fever of irritation. She gently and firmly laid her band on his wrist.

“Don’t!” she said. “Put it away.”

He flung the stick into the currant-bushes, and leaned back. Now he was bottled up.

“What is it?” she pleaded softly.

He lay perfectly still, only his eyes alive, and they full of torment.

“You know,” he said at length, rather wearily—“you know—we’d better break off.”

It was what she dreaded. Swiftly everything seemed to darken before her eyes.

“Why!” she murmured. “What has happened?”

“Nothing has happened. We only realise where we are. It’s no good—”

She waited in silence, sadly, patiently. It was no good being impatient with him. At any rate, he would tell her now what ailed him.

“We agreed on friendship,” he went on in a dull, monotonous voice. “How often have we agreed for friendship! And yet—it neither stops there, nor gets anywhere else.”

He was silent again. She brooded. What did he mean? He was so wearying. There was something he would not yield. Yet she must be patient with him.

“I can only give friendship—it’s all I’m capable of—it’s a flaw in my make-up. The thing overbalances to one side—I hate a toppling balance. Let us have done.”

There was warmth of fury in his last phrases. He meant she loved him more than he her. Perhaps he could not love her. Perhaps she had not in herself that which he wanted. It was the deepest motive of her soul, this self-mistrust. It was so deep she dared neither realise nor acknowledge. Perhaps she was deficient. Like an infinitely subtle shame, it kept her always back. If it were so, she would do without him. She would never let herself want him. She would merely see.

“But what has happened?” she said.

“Nothing—it’s all in myself—it only comes out just now. We’re always like this towards Easter-time.”

He grovelled so helplessly, she pitied him. At least she never floundered in such a pitiable way. After all, it was he who was chiefly humiliated.

“What do you want?” she asked him.

“Why—I mustn’t come often—that’s all. Why should I monopolise you when I’m not—You see, I’m deficient in something with regard to you—”

He was telling her he did not love her, and so ought to leave her a chance with another man. How foolish and blind and shamefully clumsy he was! What were other men to her! What were men to her at all! But he, ah! she loved his soul. Was he deficient in something? Perhaps he was.

“But I don’t understand,” she said huskily. “Yesterday—”

The night was turning jangled and hateful to him as the twilight faded. And she bowed under her suffering.

“I know,” he cried, “you never will! You’ll never believe that I can’t—can’t physically, any more than I can fly up like a skylark—”

“What?” she murmured. Now she dreaded.

“Love you.”

He hated her bitterly at that moment because he made her suffer. Love her! She knew he loved her. He really belonged to her. This about not loving her, physically, bodily, was a mere perversity on his part, because he knew she loved him. He was stupid like a child. He belonged to her. His soul wanted her. She guessed somebody had been influencing him. She felt upon him the hardness, the foreignness of another influence.

“What have they been saying at home?” she asked.

“It’s not that,” he answered.

And then she knew it was. She despised them for their commonness, his people. They did not know what things were really worth.

He and she talked very little more that night. After all he left her to cycle with Edgar.

He had come back to his mother. Hers was the strongest tie in his life. When he thought round, Miriam shrank away. There was a vague, unreal feel about her. And nobody else mattered. There was one place in the world that stood solid and did not melt into unreality: the place where his mother was. Everybody else could grow shadowy, almost non-existent to him, but she could not. It was as if the pivot and pole of his life, from which he could not escape, was his mother.

And in the same way she waited for him. In him was established her life now. After all, the life beyond offered very little to Mrs. Morel. She saw that our chance for doing is here, and doing counted with her. Paul was going to prove that she had been right; he was going to make a man whom nothing should shift off his feet; he was going to alter the face of the earth in some way which mattered. Wherever he went she felt her soul went with him. Whatever he did she felt her soul stood by him, ready, as it were, to hand him his tools. She could not bear it when he was with Miriam. William was dead. She would fight to keep Paul.

And he came back to her. And in his soul was a feeling of the satisfaction of self-sacrifice because he was faithful to her. She loved him first; he loved her first. And yet it was not enough. His new young life, so strong and imperious, was urged towards something else. It made him mad with restlessness. She saw this, and wished bitterly that Miriam had been a woman who could take this new life of his, and leave her the roots. He fought against his mother almost as he fought against Miriam.

It was a week before he went again to Willey Farm. Miriam had suffered a great deal, and was afraid to see him again. Was she now to endure the ignominy of his abandoning her? That would only be superficial and temporary. He would come back. She held the keys to his soul. But meanwhile, how he would torture her with his battle against her. She shrank from it.

However, the Sunday after Easter he came to tea. Mrs. Leivers was glad to see him. She gathered something was fretting him, that he found things hard. He seemed to drift to her for comfort. And she was good to him. She did him that great kindness of treating him almost with reverence.

He met her with the young children in the front garden.

“I’m glad you’ve come,” said the mother, looking at him with her great appealing brown eyes. “It is such a sunny day. I was just going down the fields for the first time this year.”

He felt she would like him to come. That soothed him. They went, talking simply, he gentle and humble. He could have wept with gratitude that she was deferential to him. He was feeling humiliated.

At the bottom of the Mow Close they found a thrush’s nest.

“Shall I show you the eggs?” he said.

“Do!” replied Mrs. Leivers. “They seem such a sign of spring, and so hopeful.”

He put aside the thorns, and took out the eggs, holding them in the palm of his hand.

“They are quite hot—I think we frightened her off them,” he said.

“Ay, poor thing!” said Mrs. Leivers.

Miriam could not help touching the eggs, and his hand which, it seemed to her, cradled them so well.

“Isn’t it a strange warmth!” she murmured, to get near him.

“Blood heat,” he answered.

She watched him putting them back, his body pressed against the hedge, his arm reaching slowly through the thorns, his hand folded carefully over the eggs. He was concentrated on the act. Seeing him so, she loved him; he seemed so simple and sufficient to himself. And she could not get to him.

After tea she stood hesitating at the bookshelf. He took “Tartarin de Tarascon”. Again they sat on the bank of hay at the foot of the stack. He read a couple of pages, but without any heart for it. Again the dog came racing up to repeat the fun of the other day. He shoved his muzzle in the man’s chest. Paul fingered his ear for a moment. Then he pushed him away.

“Go away, Bill,” he said. “I don’t want you.”

Bill slunk off, and Miriam wondered and dreaded what was coming. There was a silence about the youth that made her still with apprehension. It was not his furies, but his quiet resolutions that she feared.

Turning his face a little to one side, so that she could not see him, he began, speaking slowly and painfully:

“Do you think—if I didn’t come up so much—you might get to like somebody else—another man?”

So this was what he was still harping on.

“But I don’t know any other men. Why do you ask?” she replied, in a low tone that should have been a reproach to him.

“Why,” he blurted, “because they say I’ve no right to come up like this—without we mean to marry—”

Miriam was indignant at anybody’s forcing the issues between them. She had been furious with her own father for suggesting to Paul, laughingly, that he knew why he came so much.

“Who says?” she asked, wondering if her people had anything to do with it. They had not.

“Mother—and the others. They say at this rate everybody will consider me engaged, and I ought to consider myself so, because it’s not fair to you. And I’ve tried to find out—and I don’t think I love you as a man ought to love his wife. What do you think about it?”

Miriam bowed her head moodily. She was angry at having this struggle. People should leave him and her alone.

“I don’t know,” she murmured.

“Do you think we love each other enough to marry?” he asked definitely. It made her tremble.

“No,” she answered truthfully. “I don’t think so—we’re too young.”

“I thought perhaps,” he went on miserably, “that you, with your intensity in things, might have given me more—than I could ever make up to you. And even now—if you think it better—we’ll be engaged.”

Now Miriam wanted to cry. And she was angry, too. He was always such a child for people to do as they liked with.

“No, I don’t think so,” she said firmly.

He pondered a minute.

“You see,” he said, “with me—I don’t think one person would ever monopolise me—be everything to me—I think never.”

This she did not consider.

“No,” she murmured. Then, after a pause, she looked at him, and her dark eyes flashed.

“This is your mother,” she said. “I know she never liked me.”

“No, no, it isn’t,” he said hastily. “It was for your sake she spoke this time. She only said, if I was going on, I ought to consider myself engaged.” There was a silence. “And if I ask you to come down any time, you won’t stop away, will you?”

She did not answer. By this time she was very angry.

“Well, what shall we do?” she said shortly. “I suppose I’d better drop French. I was just beginning to get on with it. But I suppose I can go on alone.”

“I don’t see that we need,” he said. “I can give you a French lesson, surely.”

“Well—and there are Sunday nights. I shan’t stop coming to chapel, because I enjoy it, and it’s all the social life I get. But you’ve no need to come home with me. I can go alone.”

“All right,” he answered, rather taken aback. “But if I ask Edgar, he’ll always come with us, and then they can say nothing.”

There was silence. After all, then, she would not lose much. For all their talk down at his home there would not be much difference. She wished they would mind their own business.

“And you won’t think about it, and let it trouble you, will you?” he asked.

“Oh no,” replied Miriam, without looking at him.

He was silent. She thought him unstable. He had no fixity of purpose, no anchor of righteousness that held him.

“Because,” he continued, “a man gets across his bicycle—and goes to work—and does all sorts of things. But a woman broods.”

“No, I shan’t bother,” said Miriam. And she meant it.

It had gone rather chilly. They went indoors.

“How white Paul looks!” Mrs. Leivers exclaimed. “Miriam, you shouldn’t have let him sit out of doors. Do you think you’ve taken cold, Paul?”

“Oh, no!” he laughed.

But he felt done up. It wore him out, the conflict in himself. Miriam pitied him now. But quite early, before nine o’clock, he rose to go.

“You’re not going home, are you?” asked Mrs. Leivers anxiously.

“Yes,” he replied. “I said I’d be early.” He was very awkward.

“But this is early,” said Mrs. Leivers.

Miriam sat in the rocking-chair, and did not speak. He hesitated, expecting her to rise and go with him to the barn as usual for his bicycle. She remained as she was. He was at a loss.

“Well—good-night, all!” he faltered.

She spoke her good-night along with all the others. But as he went past the window he looked in. She saw him pale, his brows knit slightly in a way that had become constant with him, his eyes dark with pain.

She rose and went to the doorway to wave good-bye to him as he passed through the gate. He rode slowly under the pine-trees, feeling a cur and a miserable wretch. His bicycle went tilting down the hills at random. He thought it would be a relief to break one’s neck.

Two days later he sent her up a book and a little note, urging her to read and be busy.

At this time he gave all his friendship to Edgar. He loved the family so much, he loved the farm so much; it was the dearest place on earth to him. His home was not so lovable. It was his mother. But then he would have been just as happy with his mother anywhere. Whereas Willey Farm he loved passionately. He loved the little pokey kitchen, where men’s boots tramped, and the dog slept with one eye open for fear of being trodden on; where the lamp hung over the table at night, and everything was so silent. He loved Miriam’s long, low parlour, with its atmosphere of romance, its flowers, its books, its high rosewood piano. He loved the gardens and the buildings that stood with their scarlet roofs on the naked edges of the fields, crept towards the wood as if for cosiness, the wild country scooping down a valley and up the uncultured hills of the other side. Only to be there was an exhilaration and a joy to him. He loved Mrs. Leivers, with her unworldliness and her quaint cynicism; he loved Mr. Leivers, so warm and young and lovable; he loved Edgar, who lit up when he came, and the boys and the children and Bill—even the sow Circe and the Indian game-cock called Tippoo. All this besides Miriam. He could not give it up.

So he went as often, but he was usually with Edgar. Only all the family, including the father, joined in charades and games at evening. And later, Miriam drew them together, and they read Macbeth out of penny books, taking parts. It was great excitement. Miriam was glad, and Mrs. Leivers was glad, and Mr. Leivers enjoyed it. Then they all learned songs together from tonic sol-fa, singing in a circle round the fire. But now Paul was very rarely alone with Miriam. She waited. When she and Edgar and he walked home together from chapel or from the literary society in Bestwood, she knew his talk, so passionate and so unorthodox nowadays, was for her. She did envy Edgar, however, his cycling with Paul, his Friday nights, his days working in the fields. For her Friday nights and her French lessons were gone. She was nearly always alone, walking, pondering in the wood, reading, studying, dreaming, waiting. And he wrote to her frequently.

One Sunday evening they attained to their old rare harmony. Edgar had stayed to Communion—he wondered what it was like—with Mrs. Morel. So Paul came on alone with Miriam to his home. He was more or less under her spell again. As usual, they were discussing the sermon. He was setting now full sail towards Agnosticism, but such a religious Agnosticism that Miriam did not suffer so badly. They were at the Renan Vie de Jésus stage. Miriam was the threshing-floor on which he threshed out all his beliefs. While he trampled his ideas upon her soul, the truth came out for him. She alone was his threshing-floor. She alone helped him towards realisation. Almost impassive, she submitted to his argument and expounding. And somehow, because of her, he gradually realised where he was wrong. And what he realised, she realised. She felt he could not do without her.

They came to the silent house. He took the key out of the scullery window, and they entered. All the time he went on with his discussion. He lit the gas, mended the fire, and brought her some cakes from the pantry. She sat on the sofa, quietly, with a plate on her knee. She wore a large white hat with some pinkish flowers. It was a cheap hat, but he liked it. Her face beneath was still and pensive, golden-brown and ruddy. Always her ears were hid in her short curls. She watched him.

She liked him on Sundays. Then he wore a dark suit that showed the lithe movement of his body. There was a clean, clear-cut look about him. He went on with his thinking to her. Suddenly he reached for a Bible. Miriam liked the way he reached up—so sharp, straight to the mark. He turned the pages quickly, and read her a chapter of St. John. As he sat in the armchair reading, intent, his voice only thinking, she felt as if he were using her unconsciously as a man uses his tools at some work he is bent on. She loved it. And the wistfulness of his voice was like a reaching to something, and it was as if she were what he reached with. She sat back on the sofa away from him, and yet feeling herself the very instrument his hand grasped. It gave her great pleasure.

Then he began to falter and to get self-conscious. And when he came to the verse, “A woman, when she is in travail, hath sorrow because her hour is come”, he missed it out. Miriam had felt him growing uncomfortable. She shrank when the well-known words did not follow. He went on reading, but she did not hear. A grief and shame made her bend her head. Six months ago he would have read it simply. Now there was a scotch in his running with her. Now she felt there was really something hostile between them, something of which they were ashamed.

She ate her cake mechanically. He tried to go on with his argument, but could not get back the right note. Soon Edgar came in. Mrs. Morel had gone to her friends’. The three set off to Willey Farm.

Miriam brooded over his split with her. There was something else he wanted. He could not be satisfied; he could give her no peace. There was between them now always a ground for strife. She wanted to prove him. She believed that his chief need in life was herself. If she could prove it, both to herself and to him, the rest might go; she could simply trust to the future.

So in May she asked him to come to Willey Farm and meet Mrs. Dawes. There was something he hankered after. She saw him, whenever they spoke of Clara Dawes, rouse and get slightly angry. He said he did not like her. Yet he was keen to know about her. Well, he should put himself to the test. She believed that there were in him desires for higher things, and desires for lower, and that the desire for the higher would conquer. At any rate, he should try. She forgot that her “higher” and “lower” were arbitrary.

He was rather excited at the idea of meeting Clara at Willey Farm. Mrs. Dawes came for the day. Her heavy, dun-coloured hair was coiled on top of her head. She wore a white blouse and navy skirt, and somehow, wherever she was, seemed to make things look paltry and insignificant. When she was in the room, the kitchen seemed too small and mean altogether. Miriam’s beautiful twilighty parlour looked stiff and stupid. All the Leivers were eclipsed like candles. They found her rather hard to put up with. Yet she was perfectly amiable, but indifferent, and rather hard.

Paul did not come till afternoon. He was early. As he swung off his bicycle, Miriam saw him look round at the house eagerly. He would be disappointed if the visitor had not come. Miriam went out to meet him, bowing her head because of the sunshine. Nasturtiums were coming out crimson under the cool green shadow of their leaves. The girl stood, dark-haired, glad to see him.

“Hasn’t Clara come?” he asked.

“Yes,” replied Miriam in her musical tone. “She’s reading.”

He wheeled his bicycle into the barn. He had put on a handsome tie, of which he was rather proud, and socks to match.

“She came this morning?” he asked.

“Yes,” replied Miriam, as she walked at his side. “You said you’d bring me that letter from the man at Liberty’s. Have you remembered?”

“Oh, dash, no!” he said. “But nag at me till you get it.”

“I don’t like to nag at you.”

“Do it whether or not. And is she any more agreeable?” he continued.

“You know I always think she is quite agreeable.”

He was silent. Evidently his eagerness to be early to-day had been the newcomer. Miriam already began to suffer. They went together towards the house. He took the clips off his trousers, but was too lazy to brush the dust from his shoes, in spite of the socks and tie.

Clara sat in the cool parlour reading. He saw the nape of her white neck, and the fine hair lifted from it. She rose, looking at him indifferently. To shake hands she lifted her arm straight, in a manner that seemed at once to keep him at a distance, and yet to fling something to him. He noticed how her breasts swelled inside her blouse, and how her shoulder curved handsomely under the thin muslin at the top of her arm.

“You have chosen a fine day,” he said.

“It happens so,” she said.

“Yes,” he said; “I am glad.”

She sat down, not thanking him for his politeness.

“What have you been doing all morning?” asked Paul of Miriam.

“Well, you see,” said Miriam, coughing huskily, “Clara only came with father—and so—she’s not been here very long.”

Clara sat leaning on the table, holding aloof. He noticed her hands were large, but well kept. And the skin on them seemed almost coarse, opaque, and white, with fine golden hairs. She did not mind if he observed her hands. She intended to scorn him. Her heavy arm lay negligently on the table. Her mouth was closed as if she were offended, and she kept her face slightly averted.

“You were at Margaret Bonford’s meeting the other evening,” he said to her.

Miriam did not know this courteous Paul. Clara glanced at him.

“Yes,” she said.

“Why,” asked Miriam, “how do you know?”

“I went in for a few minutes before the train came,” he answered.

Clara turned away again rather disdainfully.

“I think she’s a lovable little woman,” said Paul.

“Margaret Bonford!” exclaimed Clara. “She’s a great deal cleverer than most men.”

“Well, I didn’t say she wasn’t,” he said, deprecating. “She’s lovable for all that.”

“And, of course, that is all that matters,” said Clara witheringly.

He rubbed his head, rather perplexed, rather annoyed.

“I suppose it matters more than her cleverness,” he said; “which, after all, would never get her to heaven.”

“It’s not heaven she wants to get—it’s her fair share on earth,” retorted Clara. She spoke as if he were responsible for some deprivation which Miss Bonford suffered.

“Well,” he said, “I thought she was warm, and awfully nice—only too frail. I wished she was sitting comfortably in peace—”

“‘Darning her husband’s stockings,’” said Clara scathingly.

“I’m sure she wouldn’t mind darning even my stockings,” he said. “And I’m sure she’d do them well. Just as I wouldn’t mind blacking her boots if she wanted me to.”

But Clara refused to answer this sally of his. He talked to Miriam for a little while. The other woman held aloof.

“Well,” he said, “I think I’ll go and see Edgar. Is he on the land?”

“I believe,” said Miriam, “he’s gone for a load of coal. He should be back directly.”

“Then,” he said, “I’ll go and meet him.”

Miriam dared not propose anything for the three of them. He rose and left them.

On the top road, where the gorse was out, he saw Edgar walking lazily beside the mare, who nodded her white-starred forehead as she dragged the clanking load of coal. The young farmer’s face lighted up as he saw his friend. Edgar was good-looking, with dark, warm eyes. His clothes were old and rather disreputable, and he walked with considerable pride.

“Hello!” he said, seeing Paul bareheaded. “Where are you going?”

“Came to meet you. Can’t stand ‘Nevermore.’”

Edgar’s teeth flashed in a laugh of amusement.

“Who is ‘Nevermore’?” he asked.

“The lady—Mrs. Dawes—it ought to be Mrs. The Raven that quothed ‘Nevermore.’”

Edgar laughed with glee.

“Don’t you like her?” he asked.

“Not a fat lot,” said Paul. “Why, do you?”

“No!” The answer came with a deep ring of conviction. “No!” Edgar pursed up his lips. “I can’t say she’s much in my line.” He mused a little. Then: “But why do you call her ‘Nevermore’?” he asked.

“Well,” said Paul, “if she looks at a man she says haughtily ‘Nevermore,’ and if she looks at herself in the looking-glass she says disdainfully ‘Nevermore,’ and if she thinks back she says it in disgust, and if she looks forward she says it cynically.”

Edgar considered this speech, failed to make much out of it, and said, laughing:

“You think she’s a man-hater?”

“She thinks she is,” replied Paul.

“But you don’t think so?”

“No,” replied Paul.

“Wasn’t she nice with you, then?”

“Could you imagine her nice with anybody?” asked the young man.

Edgar laughed. Together they unloaded the coal in the yard. Paul was rather self-conscious, because he knew Clara could see if she looked out of the window. She didn’t look.

On Saturday afternoons the horses were brushed down and groomed. Paul and Edgar worked together, sneezing with the dust that came from the pelts of Jimmy and Flower.

“Do you know a new song to teach me?” said Edgar.

He continued to work all the time. The back of his neck was sun-red when he bent down, and his fingers that held the brush were thick. Paul watched him sometimes.

“‘Mary Morrison’?” suggested the younger.

Edgar agreed. He had a good tenor voice, and he loved to learn all the songs his friend could teach him, so that he could sing whilst he was carting. Paul had a very indifferent baritone voice, but a good ear. However, he sang softly, for fear of Clara. Edgar repeated the line in a clear tenor. At times they both broke off to sneeze, and first one, then the other, abused his horse.

Miriam was impatient of men. It took so little to amuse them—even Paul. She thought it anomalous in him that he could be so thoroughly absorbed in a triviality.

It was tea-time when they had finished.

“What song was that?” asked Miriam.

Edgar told her. The conversation turned to singing.

“We have such jolly times,” Miriam said to Clara.

Mrs. Dawes ate her meal in a slow, dignified way. Whenever the men were present she grew distant.

“Do you like singing?” Miriam asked her.

“If it is good,” she said.

Paul, of course, coloured.

“You mean if it is high-class and trained?” he said.

“I think a voice needs training before the singing is anything,” she said.

“You might as well insist on having people’s voices trained before you allowed them to talk,” he replied. “Really, people sing for their own pleasure, as a rule.”

“And it may be for other people’s discomfort.”

“Then the other people should have flaps to their ears,” he replied.

The boys laughed. There was a silence. He flushed deeply, and ate in silence.

After tea, when all the men had gone but Paul, Mrs. Leivers said to Clara:

“And you find life happier now?”

“Infinitely.”

“And you are satisfied?”

“So long as I can be free and independent.”

“And you don’t miss anything in your life?” asked Mrs. Leivers gently.

“I’ve put all that behind me.”

Paul had been feeling uncomfortable during this discourse. He got up.

“You’ll find you’re always tumbling over the things you’ve put behind you,” he said. Then he took his departure to the cowsheds. He felt he had been witty, and his manly pride was high. He whistled as he went down the brick track.

Miriam came for him a little later to know if he would go with Clara and her for a walk. They set off down to Strelley Mill Farm. As they were going beside the brook, on the Willey Water side, looking through the brake at the edge of the wood, where pink campions glowed under a few sunbeams, they saw, beyond the tree-trunks and the thin hazel bushes, a man leading a great bay horse through the gullies. The big red beast seemed to dance romantically through that dimness of green hazel drift, away there where the air was shadowy, as if it were in the past, among the fading bluebells that might have bloomed for Deidre or Iseult.

The three stood charmed.

“What a treat to be a knight,” he said, “and to have a pavilion here.”

“And to have us shut up safely?” replied Clara.

“Yes,” he answered, “singing with your maids at your broidery. I would carry your banner of white and green and heliotrope. I would have ‘W.S.P.U.’ emblazoned on my shield, beneath a woman rampant.”

“I have no doubt,” said Clara, “that you would much rather fight for a woman than let her fight for herself.”

“I would. When she fights for herself she seems like a dog before a looking-glass, gone into a mad fury with its own shadow.”

“And you are the looking-glass?” she asked, with a curl of the lip.

“Or the shadow,” he replied.

“I am afraid,” she said, “that you are too clever.”

“Well, I leave it to you to be good,” he retorted, laughing. “Be good, sweet maid, and just let me be clever.”

But Clara wearied of his flippancy. Suddenly, looking at her, he saw that the upward lifting of her face was misery and not scorn. His heart grew tender for everybody. He turned and was gentle with Miriam, whom he had neglected till then.

At the wood’s edge they met Limb, a thin, swarthy man of forty, tenant of Strelley Mill, which he ran as a cattle-raising farm. He held the halter of the powerful stallion indifferently, as if he were tired. The three stood to let him pass over the stepping-stones of the first brook. Paul admired that so large an animal should walk on such springy toes, with an endless excess of vigour. Limb pulled up before them.

“Tell your father, Miss Leivers,” he said, in a peculiar piping voice, “that his young beas’es ’as broke that bottom fence three days an’ runnin’.”

“Which?” asked Miriam, tremulous.

The great horse breathed heavily, shifting round its red flanks, and looking suspiciously with its wonderful big eyes upwards from under its lowered head and falling mane.

“Come along a bit,” replied Limb, “an’ I’ll show you.”

The man and the stallion went forward. It danced sideways, shaking its white fetlocks and looking frightened, as it felt itself in the brook.

“No hanky-pankyin’,” said the man affectionately to the beast.

It went up the bank in little leaps, then splashed finely through the second brook. Clara, walking with a kind of sulky abandon, watched it half-fascinated, half-contemptuous. Limb stopped and pointed to the fence under some willows.

“There, you see where they got through,” he said. “My man’s druv ’em back three times.”

“Yes,” answered Miriam, colouring as if she were at fault.

“Are you comin’ in?” asked the man.

“No, thanks; but we should like to go by the pond.”

“Well, just as you’ve a mind,” he said.

The horse gave little whinneys of pleasure at being so near home.

“He is glad to be back,” said Clara, who was interested in the creature.

“Yes—’e’s been a tidy step to-day.”

They went through the gate, and saw approaching them from the big farmhouse a smallish, dark, excitable-looking woman of about thirty-five. Her hair was touched with grey, her dark eyes looked wild. She walked with her hands behind her back. Her brother went forward. As it saw her, the big bay stallion whinneyed again. She came up excitedly.

“Are you home again, my boy!” she said tenderly to the horse, not to the man. The great beast shifted round to her, ducking his head. She smuggled into his mouth the wrinkled yellow apple she had been hiding behind her back, then she kissed him near the eyes. He gave a big sigh of pleasure. She held his head in her arms against her breast.

“Isn’t he splendid!” said Miriam to her.

Miss Limb looked up. Her dark eyes glanced straight at Paul.

“Oh, good-evening, Miss Leivers,” she said. “It’s ages since you’ve been down.”

Miriam introduced her friends.

“Your horse is a fine fellow!” said Clara.

“Isn’t he!” Again she kissed him. “As loving as any man!”

“More loving than most men, I should think,” replied Clara.

“He’s a nice boy!” cried the woman, again embracing the horse.

Clara, fascinated by the big beast, went up to stroke his neck.

“He’s quite gentle,” said Miss Limb. “Don’t you think big fellows are?”

“He’s a beauty!” replied Clara.

She wanted to look in his eyes. She wanted him to look at her.

“It’s a pity he can’t talk,” she said.

“Oh, but he can—all but,” replied the other woman.

Then her brother moved on with the horse.

“Are you coming in? Do come in, Mr.—I didn’t catch it.”

“Morel,” said Miriam. “No, we won’t come in, but we should like to go by the mill-pond.”

“Yes—yes, do. Do you fish, Mr. Morel?”

“No,” said Paul.

“Because if you do you might come and fish any time,” said Miss Limb. “We scarcely see a soul from week’s end to week’s end. I should be thankful.”

“What fish are there in the pond?” he asked.

They went through the front garden, over the sluice, and up the steep bank to the pond, which lay in shadow, with its two wooded islets. Paul walked with Miss Limb.

“I shouldn’t mind swimming here,” he said.

“Do,” she replied. “Come when you like. My brother will be awfully pleased to talk with you. He is so quiet, because there is no one to talk to. Do come and swim.”

Clara came up.

“It’s a fine depth,” she said, “and so clear.”

“Yes,” said Miss Limb.

“Do you swim?” said Paul. “Miss Limb was just saying we could come when we liked.”

“Of course there’s the farm-hands,” said Miss Limb.

They talked a few moments, then went on up the wild hill, leaving the lonely, haggard-eyed woman on the bank.

The hillside was all ripe with sunshine. It was wild and tussocky, given over to rabbits. The three walked in silence. Then:

“She makes me feel uncomfortable,” said Paul.

“You mean Miss Limb?” asked Miriam. “Yes.”

“What’s a matter with her? Is she going dotty with being too lonely?”

“Yes,” said Miriam. “It’s not the right sort of life for her. I think it’s cruel to bury her there. I really ought to go and see her more. But—she upsets me.”

“She makes me feel sorry for her—yes, and she bothers me,” he said.

“I suppose,” blurted Clara suddenly, “she wants a man.”

The other two were silent for a few moments.

“But it’s the loneliness sends her cracked,” said Paul.

Clara did not answer, but strode on uphill. She was walking with her hand hanging, her legs swinging as she kicked through the dead thistles and the tussocky grass, her arms hanging loose. Rather than walking, her handsome body seemed to be blundering up the hill. A hot wave went over Paul. He was curious about her. Perhaps life had been cruel to her. He forgot Miriam, who was walking beside him talking to him. She glanced at him, finding he did not answer her. His eyes were fixed ahead on Clara.

“Do you still think she is disagreeable?” she asked.

He did not notice that the question was sudden. It ran with his thoughts.

“Something’s the matter with her,” he said.

“Yes,” answered Miriam.

They found at the top of the hill a hidden wild field, two sides of which were backed by the wood, the other sides by high loose hedges of hawthorn and elder bushes. Between these overgrown bushes were gaps that the cattle might have walked through had there been any cattle now. There the turf was smooth as velveteen, padded and holed by the rabbits. The field itself was coarse, and crowded with tall, big cowslips that had never been cut. Clusters of strong flowers rose everywhere above the coarse tussocks of bent. It was like a roadstead crowded with tan, fairy shipping.

“Ah!” cried Miriam, and she looked at Paul, her dark eyes dilating. He smiled. Together they enjoyed the field of flowers. Clara, a little way off, was looking at the cowslips disconsolately. Paul and Miriam stayed close together, talking in subdued tones. He kneeled on one knee, quickly gathering the best blossoms, moving from tuft to tuft restlessly, talking softly all the time. Miriam plucked the flowers lovingly, lingering over them. He always seemed to her too quick and almost scientific. Yet his bunches had a natural beauty more than hers. He loved them, but as if they were his and he had a right to them. She had more reverence for them: they held something she had not.

The flowers were very fresh and sweet. He wanted to drink them. As he gathered them, he ate the little yellow trumpets. Clara was still wandering about disconsolately. Going towards her, he said:

“Why don’t you get some?”

“I don’t believe in it. They look better growing.”

“But you’d like some?”

“They want to be left.”

“I don’t believe they do.”

“I don’t want the corpses of flowers about me,” she said.

“That’s a stiff, artificial notion,” he said. “They don’t die any quicker in water than on their roots. And besides, they look nice in a bowl—they look jolly. And you only call a thing a corpse because it looks corpse-like.”

“Whether it is one or not?” she argued.

“It isn’t one to me. A dead flower isn’t a corpse of a flower.”

Clara now ignored him.

“And even so—what right have you to pull them?” she asked.

“Because I like them, and want them—and there’s plenty of them.”

“And that is sufficient?”

“Yes. Why not? I’m sure they’d smell nice in your room in Nottingham.”

“And I should have the pleasure of watching them die.”

“But then—it does not matter if they do die.”

Whereupon he left her, and went stooping over the clumps of tangled flowers which thickly sprinkled the field like pale, luminous foam-clots. Miriam had come close. Clara was kneeling, breathing some scent from the cowslips.

“I think,” said Miriam, “if you treat them with reverence you don’t do them any harm. It is the spirit you pluck them in that matters.”

“Yes,” he said. “But no, you get ’em because you want ’em, and that’s all.” He held out his bunch.

Miriam was silent. He picked some more.

“Look at these!” he continued; “sturdy and lusty like little trees and like boys with fat legs.”

Clara’s hat lay on the grass not far off. She was kneeling, bending forward still to smell the flowers. Her neck gave him a sharp pang, such a beautiful thing, yet not proud of itself just now. Her breasts swung slightly in her blouse. The arching curve of her back was beautiful and strong; she wore no stays. Suddenly, without knowing, he was scattering a handful of cowslips over her hair and neck, saying:

“Ashes to ashes, and dust to dust, If the Lord won’t have you the devil must.”

The chill flowers fell on her neck. She looked up at him, with almost pitiful, scared grey eyes, wondering what he was doing. Flowers fell on her face, and she shut her eyes.

Suddenly, standing there above her, he felt awkward.

“I thought you wanted a funeral,” he said, ill at ease.

Clara laughed strangely, and rose, picking the cowslips from her hair. She took up her hat and pinned it on. One flower had remained tangled in her hair. He saw, but would not tell her. He gathered up the flowers he had sprinkled over her.

At the edge of the wood the bluebells had flowed over into the field and stood there like flood-water. But they were fading now. Clara strayed up to them. He wandered after her. The bluebells pleased him.

“Look how they’ve come out of the wood!” he said.

Then she turned with a flash of warmth and of gratitude.

“Yes,” she smiled.

His blood beat up.

“It makes me think of the wild men of the woods, how terrified they would be when they got breast to breast with the open space.”

“Do you think they were?” she asked.

“I wonder which was more frightened among old tribes—those bursting out of their darkness of woods upon all the space of light, or those from the open tiptoeing into the forests.”

“I should think the second,” she answered.

“Yes, you do feel like one of the open space sort, trying to force yourself into the dark, don’t you?”

“How should I know?” she answered queerly.

The conversation ended there.

The evening was deepening over the earth. Already the valley was full of shadow. One tiny square of light stood opposite at Crossleigh Bank Farm. Brightness was swimming on the tops of the hills. Miriam came up slowly, her face in her big, loose bunch of flowers, walking ankle-deep through the scattered froth of the cowslips. Beyond her the trees were coming into shape, all shadow.

“Shall we go?” she asked.

And the three turned away. They were all silent. Going down the path they could see the light of home right across, and on the ridge of the hill a thin dark outline with little lights, where the colliery village touched the sky.

“It has been nice, hasn’t it?” he asked.

Miriam murmured assent. Clara was silent.

“Don’t you think so?” he persisted.

But she walked with her head up, and still did not answer. He could tell by the way she moved, as if she didn’t care, that she suffered.

At this time Paul took his mother to Lincoln. She was bright and enthusiastic as ever, but as he sat opposite her in the railway carriage, she seemed to look frail. He had a momentary sensation as if she were slipping away from him. Then he wanted to get hold of her, to fasten her, almost to chain her. He felt he must keep hold of her with his hand.

They drew near to the city. Both were at the window looking for the cathedral.

“There she is, mother!” he cried.

They saw the great cathedral lying couchant above the plain.

“Ah!” she exclaimed. “So she is!”

He looked at his mother. Her blue eyes were watching the cathedral quietly. She seemed again to be beyond him. Something in the eternal repose of the uplifted cathedral, blue and noble against the sky, was reflected in her, something of the fatality. What was, was. With all his young will he could not alter it. He saw her face, the skin still fresh and pink and downy, but crow’s-feet near her eyes, her eyelids steady, sinking a little, her mouth always closed with disillusion; and there was on her the same eternal look, as if she knew fate at last. He beat against it with all the strength of his soul.

“Look, mother, how big she is above the town! Think, there are streets and streets below her! She looks bigger than the city altogether.”

“So she does!” exclaimed his mother, breaking bright into life again. But he had seen her sitting, looking steady out of the window at the cathedral, her face and eyes fixed, reflecting the relentlessness of life. And the crow’s-feet near her eyes, and her mouth shut so hard, made him feel he would go mad.

They ate a meal that she considered wildly extravagant.

“Don’t imagine I like it,” she said, as she ate her cutlet. “I don’t like it, I really don’t! Just think of your money wasted!”

“You never mind my money,” he said. “You forget I’m a fellow taking his girl for an outing.”

And he bought her some blue violets.

“Stop it at once, sir!” she commanded. “How can I do it?”

“You’ve got nothing to do. Stand still!”

And in the middle of High Street he stuck the flowers in her coat.

“An old thing like me!” she said, sniffing.

“You see,” he said, “I want people to think we’re awful swells. So look ikey.”

“I’ll jowl your head,” she laughed.

“Strut!” he commanded. “Be a fantail pigeon.”

It took him an hour to get her through the street. She stood above Glory Hole, she stood before Stone Bow, she stood everywhere, and exclaimed.

A man came up, took off his hat, and bowed to her.

“Can I show you the town, madam?”

“No, thank you,” she answered. “I’ve got my son.”

Then Paul was cross with her for not answering with more dignity.

“You go away with you!” she exclaimed. “Ha! that’s the Jew’s House. Now, do you remember that lecture, Paul—?”

But she could scarcely climb the cathedral hill. He did not notice. Then suddenly he found her unable to speak. He took her into a little public-house, where she rested.

“It’s nothing,” she said. “My heart is only a bit old; one must expect it.”

He did not answer, but looked at her. Again his heart was crushed in a hot grip. He wanted to cry, he wanted to smash things in fury.

They set off again, pace by pace, so slowly. And every step seemed like a weight on his chest. He felt as if his heart would burst. At last they came to the top. She stood enchanted, looking at the castle gate, looking at the cathedral front. She had quite forgotten herself.

“Now this is better than I thought it could be!” she cried.

But he hated it. Everywhere he followed her, brooding. They sat together in the cathedral. They attended a little service in the choir. She was timid.

“I suppose it is open to anybody?” she asked him.

“Yes,” he replied. “Do you think they’d have the damned cheek to send us away.”

“Well, I’m sure,” she exclaimed, “they would if they heard your language.”

Her face seemed to shine again with joy and peace during the service. And all the time he was wanting to rage and smash things and cry.

Afterwards, when they were leaning over the wall, looking at the town below, he blurted suddenly:

“Why can’t a man have a young mother? What is she old for?”

“Well,” his mother laughed, “she can scarcely help it.”

“And why wasn’t I the oldest son? Look—they say the young ones have the advantage—but look, they had the young mother. You should have had me for your eldest son.”

“I didn’t arrange it,” she remonstrated. “Come to consider, you’re as much to blame as me.”

He turned on her, white, his eyes furious.

“What are you old for!” he said, mad with his impotence. “Why can’t you walk? Why can’t you come with me to places?”

“At one time,” she replied, “I could have run up that hill a good deal better than you.”

“What’s the good of that to me?” he cried, hitting his fist on the wall. Then he became plaintive. “It’s too bad of you to be ill. Little, it is—”

“Ill!” she cried. “I’m a bit old, and you’ll have to put up with it, that’s all.”

They were quiet. But it was as much as they could bear. They got jolly again over tea. As they sat by Brayford, watching the boats, he told her about Clara. His mother asked him innumerable questions.

“Then who does she live with?”

“With her mother, on Bluebell Hill.”

“And have they enough to keep them?”

“I don’t think so. I think they do lace work.”

“And wherein lies her charm, my boy?”

“I don’t know that she’s charming, mother. But she’s nice. And she seems straight, you know—not a bit deep, not a bit.”

“But she’s a good deal older than you.”

“She’s thirty, I’m going on twenty-three.”

“You haven’t told me what you like her for.”

“Because I don’t know—a sort of defiant way she’s got—a sort of angry way.”

Mrs. Morel considered. She would have been glad now for her son to fall in love with some woman who would—she did not know what. But he fretted so, got so furious suddenly, and again was melancholic. She wished he knew some nice woman—She did not know what she wished, but left it vague. At any rate, she was not hostile to the idea of Clara.

Annie, too, was getting married. Leonard had gone away to work in Birmingham. One week-end when he was home she had said to him:

“You don’t look very well, my lad.”

“I dunno,” he said. “I feel anyhow or nohow, ma.”

He called her “ma” already in his boyish fashion.

“Are you sure they’re good lodgings?” she asked.

“Yes—yes. Only—it’s a winder when you have to pour your own tea out—an’ nobody to grouse if you team it in your saucer and sup it up. It somehow takes a’ the taste out of it.”

Mrs. Morel laughed.

“And so it knocks you up?” she said.

“I dunno. I want to get married,” he blurted, twisting his fingers and looking down at his boots. There was a silence.

“But,” she exclaimed, “I thought you said you’d wait another year.”

“Yes, I did say so,” he replied stubbornly.

Again she considered.

“And you know,” she said, “Annie’s a bit of a spendthrift. She’s saved no more than eleven pounds. And I know, lad, you haven’t had much chance.”

He coloured up to the ears.

“I’ve got thirty-three quid,” he said.

“It doesn’t go far,” she answered.

He said nothing, but twisted his fingers.

“And you know,” she said, “I’ve nothing—”

“I didn’t want, ma!” he cried, very red, suffering and remonstrating.

“No, my lad, I know. I was only wishing I had. And take away five pounds for the wedding and things—it leaves twenty-nine pounds. You won’t do much on that.”

He twisted still, impotent, stubborn, not looking up.

“But do you really want to get married?” she asked. “Do you feel as if you ought?”

He gave her one straight look from his blue eyes.

“Yes,” he said.

“Then,” she replied, “we must all do the best we can for it, lad.”

The next time he looked up there were tears in his eyes.

“I don’t want Annie to feel handicapped,” he said, struggling.

“My lad,” she said, “you’re steady—you’ve got a decent place. If a man had needed me I’d have married him on his last week’s wages. She may find it a bit hard to start humbly. Young girls are like that. They look forward to the fine home they think they’ll have. But I had expensive furniture. It’s not everything.”

So the wedding took place almost immediately. Arthur came home, and was splendid in uniform. Annie looked nice in a dove-grey dress that she could take for Sundays. Morel called her a fool for getting married, and was cool with his son-in-law. Mrs. Morel had white tips in her bonnet, and some white on her blouse, and was teased by both her sons for fancying herself so grand. Leonard was jolly and cordial, and felt a fearful fool. Paul could not quite see what Annie wanted to get married for. He was fond of her, and she of him. Still, he hoped rather lugubriously that it would turn out all right. Arthur was astonishingly handsome in his scarlet and yellow, and he knew it well, but was secretly ashamed of the uniform. Annie cried her eyes up in the kitchen, on leaving her mother. Mrs. Morel cried a little, then patted her on the back and said:

“But don’t cry, child, he’ll be good to you.”

Morel stamped and said she was a fool to go and tie herself up. Leonard looked white and overwrought. Mrs. Morel said to him:

“I s’ll trust her to you, my lad, and hold you responsible for her.”

“You can,” he said, nearly dead with the ordeal. And it was all over.

When Morel and Arthur were in bed, Paul sat talking, as he often did, with his mother.

“You’re not sorry she’s married, mother, are you?” he asked.

“I’m not sorry she’s married—but—it seems strange that she should go from me. It even seems to me hard that she can prefer to go with her Leonard. That’s how mothers are—I know it’s silly.”

“And shall you be miserable about her?”

“When I think of my own wedding day,” his mother answered, “I can only hope her life will be different.”

“But you can trust him to be good to her?”

“Yes, yes. They say he’s not good enough for her. But I say if a man is genuine, as he is, and a girl is fond of him—then—it should be all right. He’s as good as she.”

“So you don’t mind?”

“I would never have let a daughter of mine marry a man I didn’t feel to be genuine through and through. And yet, there’s a gap now she’s gone.”

They were both miserable, and wanted her back again. It seemed to Paul his mother looked lonely, in her new black silk blouse with its bit of white trimming.

“At any rate, mother, I s’ll never marry,” he said.

“Ay, they all say that, my lad. You’ve not met the one yet. Only wait a year or two.”

“But I shan’t marry, mother. I shall live with you, and we’ll have a servant.”

“Ay, my lad, it’s easy to talk. We’ll see when the time comes.”

“What time? I’m nearly twenty-three.”

“Yes, you’re not one that would marry young. But in three years’ time—”

“I shall be with you just the same.”

“We’ll see, my boy, we’ll see.”

“But you don’t want me to marry?”

“I shouldn’t like to think of you going through your life without anybody to care for you and do—no.”

“And you think I ought to marry?”

“Sooner or later every man ought.”

“But you’d rather it were later.”

“It would be hard—and very hard. It’s as they say:

“‘A son’s my son till he takes him a wife, But my daughter’s my daughter the whole of her life.’”

“And you think I’d let a wife take me from you?”

“Well, you wouldn’t ask her to marry your mother as well as you,” Mrs. Morel smiled.

“She could do what she liked; she wouldn’t have to interfere.”

“She wouldn’t—till she’d got you—and then you’d see.”

“I never will see. I’ll never marry while I’ve got you—I won’t.”

“But I shouldn’t like to leave you with nobody, my boy,” she cried.

“You’re not going to leave me. What are you? Fifty-three! I’ll give you till seventy-five. There you are, I’m fat and forty-four. Then I’ll marry a staid body. See!”

His mother sat and laughed.

“Go to bed,” she said—“go to bed.”

“And we’ll have a pretty house, you and me, and a servant, and it’ll be just all right. I s’ll perhaps be rich with my painting.”

“Will you go to bed!”

“And then you s’ll have a pony-carriage. See yourself—a little Queen Victoria trotting round.”

“I tell you to go to bed,” she laughed.

He kissed her and went. His plans for the future were always the same.

Mrs. Morel sat brooding—about her daughter, about Paul, about Arthur. She fretted at losing Annie. The family was very closely bound. And she felt she must live now, to be with her children. Life was so rich for her. Paul wanted her, and so did Arthur. Arthur never knew how deeply he loved her. He was a creature of the moment. Never yet had he been forced to realise himself. The army had disciplined his body, but not his soul. He was in perfect health and very handsome. His dark, vigorous hair sat close to his smallish head. There was something childish about his nose, something almost girlish about his dark blue eyes. But he had the fun red mouth of a man under his brown moustache, and his jaw was strong. It was his father’s mouth; it was the nose and eyes of her own mother’s people—good-looking, weak-principled folk. Mrs. Morel was anxious about him. Once he had really run the rig he was safe. But how far would he go?

The army had not really done him any good. He resented bitterly the authority of the officers. He hated having to obey as if he were an animal. But he had too much sense to kick. So he turned his attention to getting the best out of it. He could sing, he was a boon-companion. Often he got into scrapes, but they were the manly scrapes that are easily condoned. So he made a good time out of it, whilst his self-respect was in suppression. He trusted to his good looks and handsome figure, his refinement, his decent education to get him most of what he wanted, and he was not disappointed. Yet he was restless. Something seemed to gnaw him inside. He was never still, he was never alone. With his mother he was rather humble. Paul he admired and loved and despised slightly. And Paul admired and loved and despised him slightly.

Mrs. Morel had had a few pounds left to her by her father, and she decided to buy her son out of the army. He was wild with joy. Now he was like a lad taking a holiday.

He had always been fond of Beatrice Wyld, and during his furlough he picked up with her again. She was stronger and better in health. The two often went long walks together, Arthur taking her arm in soldier’s fashion, rather stiffly. And she came to play the piano whilst he sang. Then Arthur would unhook his tunic collar. He grew flushed, his eyes were bright, he sang in a manly tenor. Afterwards they sat together on the sofa. He seemed to flaunt his body: she was aware of him so—the strong chest, the sides, the thighs in their close-fitting trousers.

He liked to lapse into the dialect when he talked to her. She would sometimes smoke with him. Occasionally she would only take a few whiffs at his cigarette.

“Nay,” he said to her one evening, when she reached for his cigarette. “Nay, tha doesna. I’ll gi’e thee a smoke kiss if ter’s a mind.”

“I wanted a whiff, no kiss at all,” she answered.

“Well, an’ tha s’lt ha’e a whiff,” he said, “along wi’ t’ kiss.”

“I want a draw at thy fag,” she cried, snatching for the cigarette between his lips.

He was sitting with his shoulder touching her. She was small and quick as lightning. He just escaped.

“I’ll gi’e thee a smoke kiss,” he said.

“Tha’rt a knivey nuisance, Arty Morel,” she said, sitting back.

“Ha’e a smoke kiss?”

The soldier leaned forward to her, smiling. His face was near hers.

“Shonna!” she replied, turning away her head.

He took a draw at his cigarette, and pursed up his mouth, and put his lips close to her. His dark-brown cropped moustache stood out like a brush. She looked at the puckered crimson lips, then suddenly snatched the cigarette from his fingers and darted away. He, leaping after her, seized the comb from her back hair. She turned, threw the cigarette at him. He picked it up, put it in his mouth, and sat down.

“Nuisance!” she cried. “Give me my comb!”

She was afraid that her hair, specially done for him, would come down. She stood with her hands to her head. He hid the comb between his knees.

“I’ve non got it,” he said.

The cigarette trembled between his lips with laughter as he spoke.

“Liar!” she said.

“’S true as I’m here!” he laughed, showing his hands.

“You brazen imp!” she exclaimed, rushing and scuffling for the comb, which he had under his knees. As she wrestled with him, pulling at his smooth, tight-covered knees, he laughed till he lay back on the sofa shaking with laughter. The cigarette fell from his mouth almost singeing his throat. Under his delicate tan the blood flushed up, and he laughed till his blue eyes were blinded, his throat swollen almost to choking. Then he sat up. Beatrice was putting in her comb.

“Tha tickled me, Beat,” he said thickly.

Like a flash her small white hand went out and smacked his face. He started up, glaring at her. They stared at each other. Slowly the flush mounted her cheek, she dropped her eyes, then her head. He sat down sulkily. She went into the scullery to adjust her hair. In private there she shed a few tears, she did not know what for.

When she returned she was pursed up close. But it was only a film over her fire. He, with ruffled hair, was sulking upon the sofa. She sat down opposite, in the armchair, and neither spoke. The clock ticked in the silence like blows.

“You are a little cat, Beat,” he said at length, half apologetically.

“Well, you shouldn’t be brazen,” she replied.

There was again a long silence. He whistled to himself like a man much agitated but defiant. Suddenly she went across to him and kissed him.

“Did it, pore fing!” she mocked.

He lifted his face, smiling curiously.

“Kiss?” he invited her.

“Daren’t I?” she asked.

“Go on!” he challenged, his mouth lifted to her.

Deliberately, and with a peculiar quivering smile that seemed to overspread her whole body, she put her mouth on his. Immediately his arms folded round her. As soon as the long kiss was finished she drew back her head from him, put her delicate fingers on his neck, through the open collar. Then she closed her eyes, giving herself up again in a kiss.

She acted of her own free will. What she would do she did, and made nobody responsible.

Paul felt life changing around him. The conditions of youth were gone. Now it was a home of grown-up people. Annie was a married woman, Arthur was following his own pleasure in a way unknown to his folk. For so long they had all lived at home, and gone out to pass their time. But now, for Annie and Arthur, life lay outside their mother’s house. They came home for holiday and for rest. So there was that strange, half-empty feeling about the house, as if the birds had flown. Paul became more and more unsettled. Annie and Arthur had gone. He was restless to follow. Yet home was for him beside his mother. And still there was something else, something outside, something he wanted.

He grew more and more restless. Miriam did not satisfy him. His old mad desire to be with her grew weaker. Sometimes he met Clara in Nottingham, sometimes he went to meetings with her, sometimes he saw her at Willey Farm. But on these last occasions the situation became strained. There was a triangle of antagonism between Paul and Clara and Miriam. With Clara he took on a smart, worldly, mocking tone very antagonistic to Miriam. It did not matter what went before. She might be intimate and sad with him. Then as soon as Clara appeared, it all vanished, and he played to the newcomer.

Miriam had one beautiful evening with him in the hay. He had been on the horse-rake, and having finished, came to help her to put the hay in cocks. Then he talked to her of his hopes and despairs, and his whole soul seemed to lie bare before her. She felt as if she watched the very quivering stuff of life in him. The moon came out: they walked home together: he seemed to have come to her because he needed her so badly, and she listened to him, gave him all her love and her faith. It seemed to her he brought her the best of himself to keep, and that she would guard it all her life. Nay, the sky did not cherish the stars more surely and eternally than she would guard the good in the soul of Paul Morel. She went on home alone, feeling exalted, glad in her faith.

And then, the next day, Clara came. They were to have tea in the hayfield. Miriam watched the evening drawing to gold and shadow. And all the time Paul was sporting with Clara. He made higher and higher heaps of hay that they were jumping over. Miriam did not care for the game, and stood aside. Edgar and Geoffrey and Maurice and Clara and Paul jumped. Paul won, because he was light. Clara’s blood was roused. She could run like an Amazon. Paul loved the determined way she rushed at the hay-cock and leaped, landed on the other side, her breasts shaken, her thick hair come undone.

“You touched!” he cried. “You touched!”

“No!” she flashed, turning to Edgar. “I didn’t touch, did I? Wasn’t I clear?”

“I couldn’t say,” laughed Edgar.

None of them could say.

“But you touched,” said Paul. “You’re beaten.”

“I did not touch!” she cried.

“As plain as anything,” said Paul.

“Box his ears for me!” she cried to Edgar.

“Nay,” Edgar laughed. “I daren’t. You must do it yourself.”

“And nothing can alter the fact that you touched,” laughed Paul.

She was furious with him. Her little triumph before these lads and men was gone. She had forgotten herself in the game. Now he was to humble her.

“I think you are despicable!” she said.

And again he laughed, in a way that tortured Miriam.

“And I knew you couldn’t jump that heap,” he teased.

She turned her back on him. Yet everybody could see that the only person she listened to, or was conscious of, was he, and he of her. It pleased the men to see this battle between them. But Miriam was tortured.

Paul could choose the lesser in place of the higher, she saw. He could be unfaithful to himself, unfaithful to the real, deep Paul Morel. There was a danger of his becoming frivolous, of his running after his satisfaction like any Arthur, or like his father. It made Miriam bitter to think that he should throw away his soul for this flippant traffic of triviality with Clara. She walked in bitterness and silence, while the other two rallied each other, and Paul sported.

And afterwards, he would not own it, but he was rather ashamed of himself, and prostrated himself before Miriam. Then again he rebelled.

“It’s not religious to be religious,” he said. “I reckon a crow is religious when it sails across the sky. But it only does it because it feels itself carried to where it’s going, not because it thinks it is being eternal.”

But Miriam knew that one should be religious in everything, have God, whatever God might be, present in everything.

“I don’t believe God knows such a lot about Himself,” he cried. “God doesn’t know things, He is things. And I’m sure He’s not soulful.”

And then it seemed to her that Paul was arguing God on to his own side, because he wanted his own way and his own pleasure. There was a long battle between him and her. He was utterly unfaithful to her even in her own presence; then he was ashamed, then repentant; then he hated her, and went off again. Those were the ever-recurring conditions.

She fretted him to the bottom of his soul. There she remained—sad, pensive, a worshipper. And he caused her sorrow. Half the time he grieved for her, half the time he hated her. She was his conscience; and he felt, somehow, he had got a conscience that was too much for him. He could not leave her, because in one way she did hold the best of him. He could not stay with her because she did not take the rest of him, which was three-quarters. So he chafed himself into rawness over her.

When she was twenty-one he wrote her a letter which could only have been written to her.

“May I speak of our old, worn love, this last time. It, too, is changing, is it not? Say, has not the body of that love died, and left you its invulnerable soul? You see, I can give you a spirit love, I have given it you this long, long time; but not embodied passion. See, you are a nun. I have given you what I would give a holy nun—as a mystic monk to a mystic nun. Surely you esteem it best. Yet you regret—no, have regretted—the other. In all our relations no body enters. I do not talk to you through the senses—rather through the spirit. That is why we cannot love in the common sense. Ours is not an everyday affection. As yet we are mortal, and to live side by side with one another would be dreadful, for somehow with you I cannot long be trivial, and, you know, to be always beyond this mortal state would be to lose it. If people marry, they must live together as affectionate humans, who may be commonplace with each other without feeling awkward—not as two souls. So I feel it.

“Ought I to send this letter?—I doubt it. But there—it is best to understand. Au revoir.”

Miriam read this letter twice, after which she sealed it up. A year later she broke the seal to show her mother the letter.

“You are a nun—you are a nun.” The words went into her heart again and again. Nothing he ever had said had gone into her so deeply, fixedly, like a mortal wound.

She answered him two days after the party.

“‘Our intimacy would have been all-beautiful but for one little mistake,’” she quoted. “Was the mistake mine?”

Almost immediately he replied to her from Nottingham, sending her at the same time a little “Omar Khayyám.”

“I am glad you answered; you are so calm and natural you put me to shame. What a ranter I am! We are often out of sympathy. But in fundamentals we may always be together I think.

“I must thank you for your sympathy with my painting and drawing. Many a sketch is dedicated to you. I do look forward to your criticisms, which, to my shame and glory, are always grand appreciations. It is a lovely joke, that. Au revoir.”

This was the end of the first phase of Paul’s love affair. He was now about twenty-three years old, and, though still virgin, the sex instinct that Miriam had over-refined for so long now grew particularly strong. Often, as he talked to Clara Dawes, came that thickening and quickening of his blood, that peculiar concentration in the breast, as if something were alive there, a new self or a new centre of consciousness, warning him that sooner or later he would have to ask one woman or another. But he belonged to Miriam. Of that she was so fixedly sure that he allowed her right.
